# Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks

**Published:** 19 Feb 2014

## Abstract

Despite the widespread practical success of deep learning methods, our theoretical understanding of
the dynamics of learning in deep neural networks remains quite sparse. We attempt to bridge the gap
between the theory and practice of deep learning by systematically analyzing learning dynamics for
the restricted case of deep linear neural networks. Despite the linearity of their input-output map,
such networks have nonlinear gradient descent dynamics on weights that change with the addition of
each new hidden layer. We show that deep linear networks exhibit nonlinear learning phenomena
similar to those seen in simulations of nonlinear networks, including long plateaus followed by
rapid transitions to lower error solutions, and faster convergence from greedy unsupervised
pretraining initial conditions than from random initial conditions. We provide an analytical
description of these phenomena by finding new exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of deep
learning. Our theoretical analysis also reveals the surprising finding that as the depth of a
network approaches infinity, learning speed can nevertheless remain finite: for a special class of
initial conditions on the weights, very deep networks incur only a finite, depth independent, delay
in learning speed relative to shallow networks. We show that, under certain conditions on the
training data, unsupervised pretraining can find this special class of initial conditions, while
scaled random Gaussian initializations cannot. We further exhibit a new class of random orthogonal
initial conditions on weights that, like unsupervised pre-training, enjoys depth independent
learning times. We further show that these initial conditions also lead to faithful propagation of
gradients even in deep nonlinear networks, as long as they operate in a special regime known as the
edge of chaos.

Deep learning methods have realized impressive performance in a range of applications, from visual
object classification [1,2,3] to speech recognition [4] and natural language processing [5,6]. These
successes have been achieved despite the noted difficulty of training such deep architectures
[7,8,9,10,11]. Indeed, many explanations for the difficulty of deep learning have been advanced in
the literature, including the presence of many local minima, low curvature regions due to saturating
nonlinearities, and exponential growth or decay of back-propagated gradients [12,13,14,15].
Furthermore, many neural network simulations have observed

strikingly nonlinear learning dynamics, including long plateaus of little apparent improvement
followed by almost stage-like transitions to better performance. However, a quantitative, analytical
understanding of the rich dynamics of deep learning remains elusive. For example, what determines
the time scales over which deep learning unfolds? How does training speed retard with depth? Under
what conditions will greedy unsupervised pretraining speed up learning? And how do the final learned
internal representations depend on the statistical regularities inherent in the training data?

Here we provide an exact analytical theory of learning in deep linear neural networks that
quantitatively answers these questions for this restricted setting. Because of its linearity, the
input-output map of a deep linear network can always be rewritten as a shallow network. In this
sense, a linear network does not gain expressive power from depth, and hence will underfit and
perform poorly on complex real world problems. But while it lacks this important aspect of practical
deep learning systems, a deep linear network can nonetheless exhibit highly nonlinear learning
dynamics, and these dynamics change with increasing depth. Indeed, the training error, as a function
of the network weights, is non-convex, and gradient descent dynamics on this non-convex error
surface exhibits a subtle interplay between different weights across multiple layers of the network.
Hence deep linear networks provide an important starting point for understanding deep learning
dynamics.

To answer these questions, we derive and analyze a set of nonlinear coupled differential equations
describing learning dynamics on weight space as a function of the statistical structure of the
inputs and outputs. We find exact time-dependent solutions to these nonlinear equations, as well as
find conserved quantities in the weight dynamics arising from symmetries in the error function.
These solutions provide intuition into how a deep network successively builds up information about
the statistical structure of the training data and embeds this information into its weights and
internal representations. Moreover, we compare our analytical solutions of learning dynamics in deep
linear networks to numerical simulations of learning dynamics in deep non-linear networks, and find
that our analytical solutions provide a reasonable approximation. Our solutions also reflect
nonlinear phenomena seen in simulations, including alternating plateaus and sharp periods of rapid
improvement. Indeed, it has been shown previously [16] that this nonlinear learning dynamics in deep
linear networks is sufficient to qualitatively capture aspects of the progressive, hierarchical
differentiation of conceptual structure seen in infant development. Next, we apply these solutions
to investigate the commonly used greedy layer-wise pretraining strategy for training deep networks
[17,18], and recover conditions under which such pretraining speeds learning. We show that these
conditions are approximately satisfied for the MNIST dataset, and that unsupervised pretraining
therefore confers an optimization advantage for deep linear networks applied to MNIST. Finally, we
exhibit a new class of random orthogonal initial conditions on weights that, in linear networks,
provide depth independent learning times, and we show that these initial conditions also lead to
faithful propagation of gradients even in deep nonlinear networks. We further show that these
initial conditions also lead to faithful propagation of gradients even in deep nonlinear networks,
as long as they operate in a special regime known as the edge of chaos. In this regime, synaptic
gains are tuned so that linear amplification due to propagation of neural activity through weight
matrices exactly balances dampening of activity due to saturating nonlinearities. In particular, we
show that even in nonlinear networks, operating in this special regime, Jacobians that are involved
in backpropagating error signals act like near isometries.

1 General learning dynamics of gradient descent We begin by analyzing learning in a three layer
network (input, hidden, and output) with linear activation functions (Fig 1 ). We let N i be the
number of neurons in layer i. The inputoutput map of the network is y = W 32 W 21 x. We wish to
train the network to learn a particular input-output map from a set of P training examples {x µ , y
µ } , µ = 1, . . . , P . Training is accomplished via gradient descent on the squared error P µ=1 y
µ -W 32 W 21 x µ 2 between the desired feature output, and the network's feature output. This
gradient descent procedure yields the batch learning rule ∆W 21 = λ P µ=1 W 32 T y µ x µT -W 32 W 21
x µ x µT , ∆W 32 = λ P µ=1 y µ x µT -W 32 W 21 x µ x µT W 21 T ,

(1) where λ is a small learning rate. As long as λ is sufficiently small, we can take a continuous
time limit to obtain the dynamics,

where Σ 11 ≡ P µ=1 x µ x µT is an N 1 × N 1 input correlation matrix, Σ 31 ≡ P µ=1 y µ x µT is an N
3 × N 1 input-output correlation matrix, and τ ≡ 1 λ . Here t measures time in units of iterations;
as t varies from 0 to 1, the network has seen P examples corresponding to one iteration. Despite the
linearity of the network's input-output map, the gradient descent learning dynamics given in Eqn (2)
constitutes a complex set of coupled nonlinear differential equations with up to cubic interactions
in the weights.

## 1.1 Learning dynamics with orthogonal inputs

Our fundamental goal is to understand the dynamics of learning in (2) as a function of the input
statistics Σ 11 and input-output statistics Σ 31 . In general, the outcome of learning will reflect
an interplay between input correlations, described by Σ 11 , and the input-output correlations
described by Σ 31 . To begin, though, we further simplify the analysis by focusing on the case of
orthogonal input representations where Σ 11 = I. This assumption will hold exactly for whitened
input data, a widely used preprocessing step.

Because we have assumed orthogonal input representations (Σ 11 = I), the input-output correlation
matrix contains all of the information about the dataset used in learning, and it plays a pivotal
role in the learning dynamics. We consider its singular value decomposition (SVD)

which will be central in our analysis. Here V 11 is an N 1 × N 1 orthogonal matrix whose columns
contain input-analyzing singular vectors v α that reflect independent modes of variation in the
input, U 33 is an N 3 × N 3 orthogonal matrix whose columns contain output-analyzing singular
vectors u α that reflect independent modes of variation in the output, and S 31 is an N 3 × N 1
matrix whose only nonzero elements are on the diagonal; these elements are the singular values s α ,
α = 1, . . . , N 1 ordered so that

Now, performing the change of variables on synaptic weight space,

the dynamics in (2) simplify to

To gain intuition for these equations, note that while the matrix elements of W 21 and W 32
connected neurons in one layer to neurons in the next layer, we can think of the matrix element W 21
iα as connecting input mode v α to hidden neuron i, and the matrix element W 32 αi as connecting
hidden neuron i to output mode u α . Let a α be the α th column of W 21 , and let b αT be the α th
row of W 32 . Intuitively, a α is a column vector of N 2 synaptic weights presynaptic to the hidden
layer coming from input mode α, and b α is a column vector of N 2 synaptic weights postsynaptic to
the hidden layer going to output mode α. In terms of these variables, or connectivity modes, the
learning dynamics in (4) become

Note that s α = 0 for α > N 1 . These dynamics arise from gradient descent on the energy function

and display an interesting combination of cooperative and competitive interactions. Consider the
first terms in each equation. In these terms, the connectivity modes from the two layers, a α and b
α associated with the same input-output mode of strength s α , cooperate with each other to drive
each other to larger magnitudes as well as point in similar directions in the space of hidden units;
in this fashion these terms drive the product of connectivity modes a α • b α to reflect the input-
output mode strength s α . The second terms describe competition between the connectivity modes in
the first (a α ) and second (b β ) layers associated with different input modes α and β. This yields
a symmetric, pairwise repulsive force between all distinct pairs of first and second layer
connectivity modes, driving the network to a decoupled regime in which the different connectivity
modes become orthogonal.

## 1.2 The final outcome of learning

The fixed point structure of gradient descent learning in linear networks was worked out in [19]. In
the language of the connectivity modes, a necessary condition for a fixed point is a α • b β = s α δ
αβ , while a α and b α are zero whenever s α = 0. To satisfy these relations for undercomplete
hidden layers (N 2 < N 1 , N 2 < N 3 ), a α and b α can be nonzero for at most N 2 values of α.
Since there are rank(Σ 31 ) ≡ r nonzero values of s α , there are r N 2 families of fixed points.
However, all of these fixed points are unstable, except for the one in which only the first N 2
strongest modes, i.e. a α and b α for α = 1, . . . , N 2 are active. Thus remarkably, the dynamics
in (5) has only saddle points and no non-global local minima [19]. In terms of the original synaptic
variables W 21 and W 32 , all globally stable fixed points satisfy Hence when learning has
converged, the network will represent the closest rank N 2 approximation to the true input-output
correlation matrix. In this work, we are interested in understanding the dynamical weight
trajectories and learning time scales that lead to this final fixed point.

## 1.3 The time course of learning

It is difficult though to exactly solve (5) starting from arbitrary initial conditions because of
the competitive interactions between different input-output modes. Therefore, to gain intuition for
the general dynamics, we restrict our attention to a special class of initial conditions of the form
a α and b α ∝ r α for α = 1, . . . , N 2 , where r α • r β = δ αβ , with all other connectivity
modes a α and b α set to zero (see [20] for 2)) from small random initial conditions. Green traces
show simulation of a nonlinear three layer network with tanh activation functions. To generate mode
strengths for the nonlinear network, we computed the nonlinear network's evolving input-output
correlation matrix, and plotted the diagonal elements of U 33 T Σ 31 tanh V 11 over time. The
training set consists of 32 orthogonal input patterns, each associated with a 1000-dimensional
feature vector generated by a hierarchical diffusion process described in [16] with a five level
binary tree and flip probability of 0.1. Modes 1, 2, 3, 5, 12, 18, and 31 are plotted with the rest
excluded for clarity. Network training parameters were λ = 0.5e -3 , N 2 = 32, u 0 = 1e -6 . Right:
Delay in learning due to competitive dynamics and sigmoidal nonlinearities. Vertical axis shows the
difference between simulated time of half learning and the analytical time of half learning, as a
fraction of the analytical time of half learning. Error bars show standard deviation from 100
simulations with random initializations. solutions to a partially overlapping but distinct set of
initial conditions, further discussed in Supplementary Appendix A). Here r α is a fixed collection
of N 2 vectors that form an orthonormal basis for synaptic connections from an input or output mode
onto the set of hidden units. Thus for this set of initial conditions, a α and b α point in the same
direction for each alpha and differ only in their scalar magnitudes, and are orthogonal to all other
connectivity modes. Such an initialization can be obtained by computing the SVD of Σ 31 and taking W
32 = U 33 D a R T , W 21 = RD b V 11 T where D a , D b are diagonal, and R is an arbitrary
orthogonal matrix; however, as we show in subsequent experiments, the solutions we find are also
excellent approximations to trajectories from small random initial conditions. It is straightforward
to verify that starting from these initial conditions, a α and b α will remain parallel to r α for
all future time. Furthermore, because the different active modes are orthogonal to each other, they
do not compete, or even interact with each other (all dot products in the second terms of (5)-( 6)
are 0).

Thus this class of conditions defines an invariant manifold in weight space where the modes evolve
independently of each other.

If we let a = a α • r α , b = b α • r α , and s = s α , then the dynamics of the scalar projections
(a, b) obeys,

Thus our ability to decouple the connectivity modes yields a dramatically simplified two dimensional
nonlinear system. These equations can by solved by noting that they arise from gradient descent on
the error,

This implies that the product ab monotonically approaches the fixed point s from its initial value.
Moreover, E(a, b) satisfies a symmetry under the one parameter family of scaling transformations a →
λa, b → b λ . This symmetry implies, through Noether's theorem, the existence of a conserved
quantity, namely a 2 -b 2 , which is a constant of motion. Thus the dynamics simply follows
hyperbolas of constant a 2 -b 2 in the (a, b) plane until it approaches the hyperbolic manifold of
fixed points, ab = s. The origin a = 0, b = 0 is also a fixed point, but is unstable. Fig. 2 shows a
typical phase portrait for these dynamics.

As a measure of the timescale of learning, we are interested in how long it takes for ab to approach
s from any given initial condition. The case of unequal a and b is treated in the Supplementary
Appendix A due to space constraints. Here we pursue an explicit solution with the assumption that a
= b, a reasonable limit when starting with small random initial conditions. We can then track the
dynamics of u ≡ ab, which from (8) obeys

This equation is separable and can be integrated to yield

Here t is the time it takes for u to travel from u 0 to u f . If we assume a small initial condition
u 0 = , and ask when u f is within of the fixed point s, i.e. u f = s -, then the learning timescale
in the limit → 0 is t = τ /s ln (s/ ) = O(τ /s) (with a weak logarithmic dependence on the cutoff).
This yields a key result: the timescale of learning of each input-output mode α of the correlation
matrix Σ 31 is inversely proportional to the correlation strength s α of the mode. Thus the stronger
an input-output relationship, the quicker it is learned.

We can also find the entire time course of learning by inverting (11) to obtain

This time course describes the temporal evolution of the product of the magnitudes of all weights
from an input mode (with correlation strength s) into the hidden layers, and from the hidden layers
to the same output mode. If this product starts at a small value u 0 < s, then it displays a
sigmoidal rise which asymptotes to s as t → ∞. This sigmoid can exhibit sharp transitions from a
state of no learning to full learning. This analytical sigmoid learning curve is shown in Fig. 3 to
yield a reasonable approximation to learning curves in linear networks that start from random
initial conditions that are not on the orthogonal, decoupled invariant manifold-and that therefore
exhibit competitive dynamics between connectivity modes-as well as in nonlinear networks solving the
same task. We note that though the nonlinear networks behaved similarly to the linear case for this
particular task, this is likely to be problem dependent.

## 2 Deeper multilayer dynamics

The network analyzed in Section 1 is the minimal example of a multilayer net, with just a single
layer of hidden units. How does gradient descent act in much deeper networks? We make an initial
attempt in this direction based on initial conditions that yield particularly simple gradient
descent dynamics.

In a linear neural network with N l layers and hence N l -1 weight matrices indexed by

the gradient descent dynamics can be written as

where

To describe the initial conditions, we suppose that there are N l orthogonal matrices R l that
diagonalize the starting weight matrices, that is, R T l+1 W l (0)R l = D l for all l, with the
special case that R 1 = V 11 and R N l = U 33 . This requirement essentially demands that the output
singular vectors of layer l be the input singular vectors of the next layer l + 1, so that a change
in mode strength at any layer propagates to the output without mixing into other modes. We note that
this formulation does not restrict hidden layer size; each hidden layer can be of a different size,
and may be undercomplete or overcomplete. Making the change of variables W l = R l+1 W l R T l along
with the assumption that Σ 11 = I leads to a set of decoupled connectivity modes that evolve
independently of each other. In analogy to the simplification occurring in the three layer network
from ( 2) to (8), each connectivity mode in the N l layered network can be described by N l -1
scalars a 1 , . . . , a N l -1 , whose dynamics obeys gradient descent on the energy function (the
analog of ( 9)),

This dynamics also has a set of conserved quantities a 2 i -a 2 j arising from the energetic
symmetry w.r.t. the transformation a i → λa i , a j → aj λ , and hence can be solved exactly. We
focus on the invariant submanifold in which a i (t = 0) = a 0 for all i, and track the dynamics of u
= N l -1 i=1 a i , the overall strength of this mode, which obeys (i.e. the generalization of (
10)),

This can be integrated for any positive integer N l , though the expression is complicated. Once the
overall strength increases sufficiently, learning explodes rapidly.

Eqn. ( 15) lets us study the dynamics of learning as depth limits to infinity. In particular, as N l
→ ∞ we have the dynamics

which can be integrated to obtain

Remarkably this implies that, for a fixed learning rate, the learning time as measured by the number
of iterations required tends to zero as N l goes to infinity. This result depends on the continuous
time formulation, however. Any implementation will operate in discrete time and must choose a finite
learning rate that yields stable dynamics. An estimate of the optimal learning rate can be derived
from the maximum eigenvalue of the Hessian over the region of interest. For linear networks with a i
= a j = a, this optimal learning rate α opt decays with depth as O

for large N l (see Supplementary Appendix B). Incorporating this dependence of the learning rate on
depth, the learning time as depth approaches infinity still surprisingly remains finite: with the
optimal learning rate, the difference between learning times for an N l = 3 network and an N l = ∞
network is t ∞ -t 3 ∼ O (s/ ) for small (see Supplementary Appendix B.1). We emphasize that our
analysis of learning speed is based on the number of iterations required, not the amount of
computation-computing one iteration of a deep network will require more time than doing so in a
shallow network.

To verify these predictions, we trained deep linear networks on the MNIST classification task with
depths ranging from N l = 3 to N l = 100. We used hidden layers of size 1000, and calculated the
iteration at which training error fell below a fixed threshold corresponding to nearly complete
learning. We optimized the learning rate separately for each depth by training each network with
twenty rates logarithmically spaced between 10 -4 and 10 -7 and picking the fastest. See
Supplementary Appendix C for full experimental details. Networks were initialized with decoupled
initial conditions and starting initial mode strength u 0 = 0.001. Fig. 4 shows the resulting
learning times, which saturate, and the empirically optimal learning rates, which scale like O(1/N l
) as predicted.

Thus learning times in deep linear networks that start with decoupled initial conditions are only a
finite amount slower than a shallow network regardless of depth. Moreover, the delay incurred by
depth scales inversely with the size of the initial strength of the association. Hence finding a way
to initialize the mode strengths to large values is crucial for fast deep learning.

## 3 Finding good weight initializations: on greediness and randomness

The previous subsection revealed the existence of a decoupled submanifold in weight space in which
connectivity modes evolve independently of each other during learning, and learning times can be
independent of depth, even for arbitrarily deep networks, as long as the initial composite, end to
end mode strength, denoted by u above, of every connectivity mode is O(1). What numerical weight
initilization procedures can get us close to this weight manifold, so that we can exploit its rapid
learning properties? A breakthrough in training deep neural networks started with the discovery that
greedy layer-wise unsupervised pretraining could substantially speed up and improve the
generalization performance of standard gradient descent [17,18]. Unsupervised pretraining has been
shown to speed the optimization of deep networks, and also to act as a special regularizer towards
solutions with better generalization performance [18,12,13,14]. At the same time, recent results
have obtained excellent performance starting from carefullyscaled random initializations, though
interestingly, pretrained initializations still exhibit faster convergence [21,13,22,3,4,1,23] (see
Supplementary Appendix D for discussion). Here we examine analytically how unsupervised pretraining
achieves an optimization advantage, at least in deep linear networks, by finding the special class
of orthogonalized, decoupled initial conditions in the previous section that allow for rapid
supervised deep learning, for input-output tasks with a certain precise structure. Subsequently, we
analyze the properties of random initilizations.

We consider the following pretraining and finetuning procedure: First, using autoencoders as the
unsupervised pretraining module [18,12], the network is trained to produce its input as its output
(y µ pre = x µ ). Subsequently, the network is finetuned on the ultimate input-output task of
interest (e.g., a classification task). In the following we consider the case N 2 = N 1 for
simplicity.

During the pretraining phase, the input-output correlation matrix Σ 31 pre is simply the input
correlation matrix Σ 11 . Hence the SVD of Σ 31 pre is PCA on the input correlation matrix, since Σ
31 pre = Σ 11 = QΛQ T , where Q are eigenvectors of Σ 11 and Λ is a diagonal matrix of variances.
Our analysis of the learning dynamics in Section 1.1 does not directly apply, because here the input
correlation matrix is not white. In Supplementary Appendix E we generalize our results to handle
this case. During pretraining, the weights approach W 32 W 21 = Σ 31 (Σ 31 ) -1 , but since they do
not reach the fixed point in finite time, they will end at W 32 W 21 = QM Q T where M is a diagonal
matrix that is approaching the identity matrix during When starting from small random weights,
though, each weight matrix will end up with a roughly balanced contribution to the overall map. This
corresponds to having C ≈ R 2 where R 2 is orthogonal. Hence at the end of the pretraining phase,
the input-to-hidden mapping will be

For the fine-tuning task, a decoupled initial condition for W 21 is one that can be written as
Section 2). Clearly, this will be possible only if

Then the initial condition obtained from pretraining will also be a decoupled initial condition for
the finetuning phase, with initial mode strengths D 1 = M 1/2 near one. Hence we can state the
underlying condition required for successful greedy pretraining in deep linear networks: the right
singular vectors of the ultimate input-ouput task of interest V 11 must be similar to the principal
components of the input data Q. This is a quantitatively precise instantiation of the intuitive idea
that unsupervised pretraining can help in a subsequent supervised learning task if (and only if) the
statistical structure of the input is consistent with the structure of input-output map to be
learned. Moreover, this quantitative instantiation of this intuitive idea gives a simple empirical
criterion that can be evaluated on any new dataset: given the input-output correlation Σ 31 and
input correlation Σ 11 , compute the right singular vectors V 11 of Σ 31 and check that V 11 Σ 11 V
11 T is approximately diagonal. If the condition in Eqn. (18) holds, autoencoder pretraining will
have properly set up decoupled initial conditions for W 21 , with an appreciable initial association
strength near 1. This argument also goes through straightforwardly for layer-wise pretraining of
deeper networks. Fig. 5 shows that this consistency condition empirically holds on MNIST, and that a
pretrained deep linear neural network learns faster than one started from small random initial
conditions, even accounting for pretraining time (see Supplementary Appendix F for experimental
details). We note that this analysis is unlikely to carry over completely to nonlinear networks.
Some nonlinear networks are approximately linear (e.g., tanh nonlinearities) after initialization
with small random initializations, and hence our solutions may describe these dynamics well early in
learning. However as the network enters its nonlinear regime, our solutions should not be expected
to remain accurate.

As an alternative to greedy layerwise pre-training, [13] proposed choosing appropriately scaled
initial conditions on weights that would preserve the norm of typical error vectors as they were
backpropagated through the deep network. In our context, the appropriate norm-preserving scaling for
the initial condition of an N by N connectivity matrix W between any two layers corresponds to
choosing each weight i.i.d. from a

, where • W denotes an average over distribution of the random matrix W . Moreover, the distribution
of v T W T W v concentrates about its mean for large N . Thus with this scaling, in linear networks,
both the forward propagation of activity, and backpropagation of gradients is typically norm-
preserving. However, with this initialization, the learning time with depth on linear networks
trained on MNIST grows with depth (Fig. 6A,left,blue). This growth is in distinct contradiction with
the theoretical prediction, made above, of depth independent learning times starting from the
decoupled submanifold of weights with composite mode strength O(1). This suggests that the scaled
random initialization scheme, despite its norm-preserving nature, does not find this submanifold in
weight space. In contrast, learning times with greedy layerwise pre-training do not grow with depth
(Fig. 6A, left, green curve hiding under red curve), consistent with the predictions of our theory
(as a technical point: note that learning times under greedy pre-training initialization in Fig. 6A
are faster than those obtained in Fig. 4 by explicitly choosing a point on the decoupled
submanifold, because there the initial mode strength was chosen to be small (u = 0.001) whereas
greedy pre-training finds a composite mode strength closer to 1).

Is there a simple random initialization scheme that does enjoy the rapid learning properties of
greedylayerwise pre-training? We empirically show (Fig. 6A, left, red curve) that if we choose the
initial weights in each layer to be a random orthogonal matrix (satisifying W T W = I), instead of a
scaled random Gaussian matrix, then this orthogonal random initialization condition yields depth
independent learning times just like greedy layerwise pre-training (indeed the red and green curves
are indistinguishable). Theoretically, why do random orthogonal initializations yield depth
independent learning times, but not scaled random Gaussian initializations, despite their norm
preserving nature?

The answer lies in the eigenvalue and singular value spectra of products of Gaussian versus
orthgonal random matrices. While a single random orthogonal matrix has eigenvalue spectra lying
exactly on the unit circle in the complex plane (Fig. 6A right), the eigenvalue spectra of random
Gaussian matrices, whose elements have variance 1/N , form a uniform distribution on a solid disk of
radius 1 the complex plane (Fig. 6C left). Moreover the singular values of an orthogonal matrix are
all exactly 1, while the squared singular values of a scaled Gaussian random matrix have the well
known Marcenko-Pasteur distribution, with a nontrivial spread even as N → ∞, (Fig. 6B left shows the
distribution of singular values themselves). Now consider a product of these matrices across all N l
layers, representing the total end to end propagation of activity across a deep linear network:

Due to the random choice of weights in each layer, W Tot is itself a random matrix. On average, it
preserves the norm of a typical vector v no matter whether the matrices in each layer are Gaussian
or orthogonal. However, the singular value spectra of W Tot differ markedly in the two cases. Under
random orthogonal initilization in each layer, W Tot is itself an orthogonal matrix and therefore
has all singular values equal to 1. However, under random Gaussian initialization in each layer,
there is as of yet no complete theoretical characterization of the singular value distribution of W
Tot . We have computed it numerically as a function of different depths in Fig. 6B, and we find that
it develops a highly kurtotic nature as the depth increases. Most of the singular values become
vanishingly small, while a long tail of very large singular values remain. Thus W Tot preserves the
norm of a typical, randomly chosen vector v, but in a highly anisotropic manner, by strongly
amplifying the projection of v onto a very small subset of singular vectors and attenuating v in all
other directions. Intuitively W Tot , as well as the linear operator W T Tot that would be closely
related to backpropagation of gradients to early layers, act as amplifying projection operators at
large depth N l . In contrast, all of the eigenvalues of W Tot in the scaled Gaussian case
concentrate closer to the origin as depth increases. This discrepancy between the behavior of the
eigenvalues and singular values of W Tot , a phenomenon that could occur only if the eigenvectors of
W Tot are highly non-orthogonal, reflects the highly non-normal nature of products of random
Gaussian matrices (a non-normal matrix is by definition a matrix whose eigenvectors are non-
orthogonal).

While the combination of amplification and projection in W Tot can preserve norm, it is clear that
it is not a good way to backpropagate errors; the projection of error vectors onto a high
dimensional subspace corresponding to small singular values would be strongly attenuated, yielding
vanishingly small gradient signals corresponding to these directions in the early layers. This
effect, which is not present for random orthogonal initializations or greedy pretraining, would
naturally explain the long learning times starting from scaled random Gaussian initial conditions
relative to the other initilizations in Fig. 6A left. For both linear and nonlinear networks, a more
likely appropriate condition on weights for generating fast learning times would be that of
dynamical isometry. By this we mean that the product of Jacobians associated with error signal
backpropagation should act as a near isometry, up to some overall global O(1) scaling, on a subspace
of as high a dimension as possible. This is equivalent to having as many singular values of the
product of Jacobians as possible within a small range around an O(1) constant, and is closely
related to the notion of restricted isometry in compressed sensing and random projections.
Preserving norms is a necessary but not sufficient condition for achieving dynamical isometry at
large depths, as demonstrated in Fig. 6B, and we have shown that for linear networks, orthogonal
initializations achieve exact dynamical isometry with all singular values at 1, while greedy pre-
training achieves it approximately.

We note that the discrepancy in learning times between the scaled Gaussian initialization and the
orthogonal or pre-training initializations is modest for the depths of around 6 used in large scale
applications, but is magnified at larger depths (Fig. 6A left). This may explain the modest
improvement in learning times with greedy pre-training versus random scaled Gaussian initializations
observed in applications (see discussion in Supplementary Appendix D). We predict that this modest
improvement will be magnified at higher depths, even in nonlinear networks. Finally, we note that in
recurrent networks, which can be thought of as infinitely deep feed-forward networks with tied
weights, a very promising approach is a modification to the training objective that partially
promotes dynamical isometry for the set of gradients currently being back-propagated [24].

## 4 Achieving approximate dynamical isometry in nonlinear networks

We have shown above that deep random orthogonal linear networks achieve perfect dynamical isometry.
Here we show that nonlinear versions of these networks can also achieve good dynamical isometry
properties. Consider the nonlinear feedforward dynamics

where x l i denotes the activity of neuron i in layer l, W (l+1,l) ij is a random orthogonal
connectivity matrix from layer l to l + 1, g is a scalar gain factor, and φ(x) is any nonlinearity
that saturates as x → ±∞. We show in Supplementary appendix G that there exists a critical value g c
of the gain g such that if g < g c , activity will decay away to zero as it propagates through the
layers, while if g > g c , the strong linear positive gain will combat the damping due to the
saturating nonlinearity, and activity will propagate indefinitely without decay, no matter how deep
the network is. When the nonlinearity is odd (φ(x) = -φ(-x)), so that the mean activity in each
layer is approximately 0, these dynamical properties can be quantitatively captured by the neural
population variance in layer l,

Thus lim l→∞ q l → 0 for g < g c and lim l→∞ q l → q ∞ (g) > 0 for g > g c . When φ(x) = tanh(x), we
compute g c = 1 and numerically compute q ∞ (g) in Fig. 8 in Supplementary appendix G. Thus these
nonlinear feedforward networks exhibit a phase-transition at the critical gain; above the critical
gain, infinitely deep networks exhibit chaotic percolating activity propagation, so we call the
critical gain g c the edge of chaos, in analogy with terminology for recurrent networks. Now we are
interested in how errors at the final layer N l backpropagate back to earlier layers, and whether or
not these gradients explode or decay with depth. To quantify this, for simplicity we consider the
end to end Jacobian

which captures how input perturbations propagate to the output. If the singular value distribution
of this Jacobian is well-behaved, with few extremely large or small singular values, then the
backpropagation of gradients will also be well-behaved, and exhibit little explosion or decay. The
Jacobian is evaluated at a particular point x N l in the space of output layer activations, and this
point is in turn obtained by iterating (20) starting from an initial input layer activation vector x
1 . Thus the singular value distribution of the (22), for various values of the gain g in ( 20) and
the input layer population variance q = q 1 in (21). The network architecture consists of N l = 100
layers with N = 1000 neurons per layer, as in the linear case in Fig. 6B. Jacobian will depend not
only on the gain g, but also on the initial condition x 1 . By rotational symmetry, we expect this
distribution to depend on x 1 , only through its population variance q 1 . Thus for large N , the
singular value distribution of the end-to-end Jacobian in (22) (the analog of W Tot in (19) in the
linear case), depends on only two parameters: gain g and input population variance q 1 . We have
numerically computed this singular value distribution as a function of these two parameters in Fig.
7, for a single random orthogonal nonlinear network with N = 1000 and N l = 100. These results are
typical; replotting the results for different random networks and different initial conditions (with
the same input variance) yield very similar results. We see that below the edge of chaos, when g <
1, the linear dampening over many layers yields extremely small singular values. Above the edge of
chaos, when g > 1, the combination of positive linear amplification, and saturating nonlinear
dampening yields an anisotropic distribution of singular values. At the edge of chaos, g = 1, an
O(1) fraction of the singular value distribu-tion is concentrated in a range that remains O(1)
despite 100 layers of propagation, reflecting appoximate dynamical isometry. Moreover, this nice
property at g = 1 remains valid even as the input variance q 1 is increased far beyond 1, where the
tanh function enters its nonlinear regime. Thus the right column of Fig. 7 at g near 1 indicates
that the useful dynamical isometry properties of random orthogonal linear networks described above
survives in nonlinear networks, even when activity patterns enter deeply into the nonlinear regime
in the input layers. Interestingly, the singular value spectrum is more robust to perturbations that
increase g from 1 relative to those that decrease g. Indeed, the anisotropy in the singular value
distribution at g = 1.1 is relatively mild compared to that of random linear networks with scaled
Gaussian initial conditions (compare the bottom row of Fig. 7 with the right column of panel B in
Fig. 6). Thus overall, these numerical results suggest that being just beyond the edge of orthogonal
chaos may be a good regime for learning in deep nonlinear networks.

## 5 Discussion

In summary, despite the simplicity of their input-output map, the dynamics of learning in deep
linear networks reveals a surprising amount of rich mathematical structure, including nonlinear
hyperbolic dynamics, plateaus and sudden performance transitions, a proliferation of saddle points,
symmetries and conserved quantities, invariant submanifolds of independently evolving connectivity
modes subserving rapid learning, and most importantly, a sensitive but computable dependence of
learning time scales on input statistics, initial weight conditions, and network depth. With the
right initial conditions, deep linear networks can be only a finite amount slower than shallow
networks, and unsupervised pretraining can find these initial conditions for tasks with the right
structure. Moreover, we introduce a mathematical condition for faithful backpropagation of error
signals, namely dynamical isometry, and show, surprisingly that random scaled Gaussian
initializations cannot achieve this condition despite their norm-preserving nature, while greedy
pre-training and random orthogonal initialization can, thereby achieving depth independent learning
times. Finally, we show that the property of dynamical isometry survives to good approximation even
in extremely deep nonlinear random orthogonal networks operating just beyond the edge of chaos. At
the cost of expressivity, deep linear networks gain theoretical tractability and may prove fertile
for addressing other phenomena in deep learning, such as the impact of carefully-scaled
initializations [13,23], momentum [23], dropout regularization [1], and sparsity constraints [2].
While a full analytical treatment of learning in deep nonlinear networks currently remains open, one
cannot reasonably hope to move towards such a theory without first completely understanding the
linear case. In this sense, our work fulfills an essential pre-requisite for progress towards a
general, quantitative theory of deep learning.

## Supplementary Material

## A Hyperbolic dynamics of learning

In Section 1.3 of the main text we treat the dynamics of learning in three layer networks where mode
strengths in each layer are equal, i.e, a = b, a reasonable limit when starting with small random
initial conditions. More generally, though, we are interested in how long it takes for ab to
approach s from any given initial condition. To access this, given the hyperbolic nature of the
dynamics, it is useful to make the hyperbolic change of coordinates,

Thus θ parametrizes the dynamically invariant manifolds a 2 -b 2 = ±c 0 . For any c 0 and θ, this
coordinate system covers the region a + b > 0, which is the basin of attraction of the upper right
component of the hyperbola ab = s. A symmetric situation exists for a + b < 0, which is attracted to
the lower left component of ab = s. We use θ as a coordinate to follow the dynamics of the product
ab, and using the relations ab = c 0 sinh θ and a 2 + b 2 = c 0 cosh θ, we obtain

This differential equation is separable in θ and t and can be integrated to yield

Here t is the amount of time it takes to travel from θ 0 to θ f along the hyperbola a 2 -b 2 = ±c 0
. The fixed point lies at θ = sinh -1 s/c 0 , but the dynamics cannot reach the fixed point in
finite time. Therefore we introduce a cutoff to mark the endpoint of learning, so that θ f obeys
sinh θ f = (1 -)s/c 0 (i.e. ab is close to s by a factor 1 -). We can then average over the initial
conditions c 0 and θ 0 to obtain the expected learning time of an input-output relation that has a
correlation strength s. Rather than doing this, it is easier to obtain a rough estimate of the
timescale of learning under the assumption that the initial weights are small, so that c 0 and θ 0
are close to 0. In this case t = O(τ /s) (with a weak logarithmic dependence on the cutoff (i.e.
ln(1/ )). This modestly generalizes the result given in the main text: the timescale of learning of
each input-output mode α of the correlation matrix Σ 31 is inversely proportional to the correlation
strength s α of the mode even when a and b differ slightly, i.e., c 0 small. This is not an
unreasonable limit for random initial conditions because |c 0 | = |a • a -b • b| where a and b are
random vectors of N 2 synaptic weights into and out of the hidden units. Thus we expect the lengths
of the two random vectors to be approximately equal and therefore c 0 will be small relative to the
length of each vector.

These solutions are distinctly different from solutions for learning dynamics in three layer
networks found in [20]. In our notation, in [20], it was shown that if the initial vectors a α and b
α satisfy the matrix identity α a α a α T = α b α b α T then the dynamics of learning becomes
equivalent to a matrix Riccatti equation. However, the hyperbolic dynamics derived here arises from
a set of initial conditions that do not satisfy the restrictions of [20] and therefore do not arise
through a solution to a matrix Ricatti equation. Moreover, in going beyond a statement of the matrix
Riccatti solution, our analysis provides intuition about the timescales over which the learning
dynamics unfolds, and crucially, our methods extend beyond the three layer case to the arbitrary N l
layer case, not studied in [20].

## B Optimal discrete time learning rates

In Section 2 we state results on the optimal learning rate as a function of depth in a deep linear
network, which we derive here. Starting from the decoupled initial conditions given in the main
text, the dynamics arise from gradient descent on

Hence for each a i we have

The elements of the Hessian are thus

≡ g(a i , a j )

for i = j, and

for i = j.

We now assume that we start on the symmetric manifold, such that a i = a j = a for all i, j. Thus we
have

The Hessian is

Now consider the second order update (Newton-Raphson) (here we use 1 to denote a vector of ones)

Note that the basin of attraction does not include small initial conditions, because for small a the
Hessian is not positive definite.

To determine the optimal learning rate for first order gradient descent, we compute the maximum of λ
1 over the range of mode strengths that can be visited during learning, i.e., a ∈ [0, s 1/(N l -1)
]. This occurs at the optimum, a opt = s 1/(N l -1) . Hence substituting this into (37) we have

The optimal learning rate α is proportional to 1/λ 1 (a opt ), and hence scales as

for large N l .

## B.1 Learning speeds with optimized learning rate

How does the optimal learning rate impact learning speeds? We compare the three layer learning time
to the infinite depth limit learning time, with learning rate set inversely proportional to Eqn.
(41) with proportionality constant c.

This yields a three layer learning time t 3 of

and an infinite layer learning time t ∞ of

Hence the difference is

where the final approximation is for u 0 = , u f = s -, and small. Thus very deep networks incur
only a finite delay relative to shallow networks.

## C Experimental setup for MNIST depth experiment

We trained deep linear networks on the MNIST dataset with fifteen different depths N l = {3, 5, 8,
10, 14, 20, 28, 36, 44, 54, 64, 74, 84, 94, 100}. Given a 784-dimensional input example, the network
tried to predict a 10-dimensional output vector containing a 1 in the index for the correct class,
and zeros elsewhere. The network was trained using batch gradient descent via Eqn. (13) on the
50,000 sample MNIST training dataset. We note that Eqn. (13) makes use of the linearity of the
network to speed training and reduce memory requirements. Instead of forward propagating all 50,000
training examples, we precompute Σ 31 and forward propagate only it. This enables experiments on
very deep networks that otherwise would be computationally infeasible. Experiments were accelerated
on GPU hardware using the GPUmat package. We used overcomplete hidden layers of size 1000. Here the
overcompleteness is simply to demonstrate the applicability of the theory to this case;
overcompleteness does not improve the representational power of the network. Networks were
initialized with decoupled initial conditions and starting initial mode strength u 0 = 0.001, as
described in the text. The random orthogonal matrices R l were selected by generating random
Gaussian matrices and computing a QR decomposition to obtain an orthogonal matrix. Learning times
were calculated as the iteration at which training error fell below a fixed threshold of 1.3×10 4
corresponding to nearly complete learning. Note that this level of performance is grossly inferior
to what can be obtained using nonlinear networks, which reflects the limited capacity of a linear
network. We optimized the learning rate λ separately for each depth by training each network with
twenty rates logarithmically spaced between 10 -4 and 10 -7 and picking the one that yielded the
minimum learning time according to our threshold criterion. The range 10 -4 and 10 -7 was selected
via preliminary experiments to ensure that the optimal learning rate always lay in the interior of
the range for all depths.

## D Efficacy of unsupervised pretraining

Recently high performance has been demonstrated in deep networks trained from random initial
conditions [21,13,22,3,4,1,23], suggesting that deep networks may not be as hard to train as
previously thought. These results show that pretraining is not necessary to obtain state-of-the-art
performance, and to achieve this they make use of a variety of techniques including carefully-scaled
random initializations, more sophisticated second order or momentum-based optimization methods, and
specialized convolutional architectures.

It is therefore important to evaluate whether unsupervised pretraining is still useful, even if it
is no longer necessary, for training deep networks. In particular, does pretraining still confer an
optimization advantage and generalization advantage when used in conjunction with these new
techniques? Here we review results from a variety of papers, which collectively show that
unsupervised pretraining still confers an optimization advantage and a generalization advantage.

## D.1 Optimization advantage

The optimization advatage of pretraining refers to faster convergence to the local optimum (i.e.,
faster learning speeds) when starting from pretrained initializations as compared to random
initializations. Faster learning speeds starting from pretrained initial conditions have been
consistently found with Hessian free optimization [21,22]. This finding holds for two carefully-
chosen random initialization schemes, the sparse connectivity scheme of [21], and the dense scaled
scheme of [13] (as used by [22]). Hence pretraining still confers a convergence speed advantage with
second order methods. Pretrained initial conditions also result in faster convergence than
carefully-chosen random initializations when optimizing with stochastic gradient descent [22,13]. In
light of this, it appears that pretrained initial conditions confer an optimization advantage beyond
what can be obtained currently with carefully-scaled random initializations, regardless of
optimization technique. If run to convergence, second order methods and well-chosen scalings can
erase the discrepancy between the final objective value obtained on the training set for pretrained
relative to random initializations [21,22]. The optimization advantage is thus purely one of
convergence speed, not of finding a better local minimum. This coincides with the situation in
linear networks, where all methods will eventually attain the same global minimum, but the rate of
convergence can vary. Our analysis shows why this optimization advantage due to pretraining persists
over well-chosen random initializations.

Finally, we note that Sutskever et al. show that careful random initialization paired with
carefully-tuned momentum can achieve excellent performance [23], but these experiments did not try
pretrained initial conditions. Krizhevsky et al. used convolutional architectures and did not
attempt pretraining [1]. Thus the possible utility of pretraining in combination with momentum, and
in combination with convolutional architectures, dropout, and large supervised datasets, remains
unclear.

## D.2 Generalization advantage

Pretraining can also act as a special regularizer, improving generalization error in certain
instances. This generalization advantage appears to persist with new second order methods [21,22],
and in comparison to gradient descent with careful random initializations [13,22,25,4]. An analysis
of this effect in deep linear networks is out of the scope of this work, though promising tools have
been developed for the three layer linear case [20].

## E Learning dynamics with task-aligned input correlations

In the main text we focused on orthogonal input correlations (Σ 11 = I) for simplicity, and to draw
out the main intuitions. However our analysis can be extended to input correlations with a very
particular structure. Recall that we decompose the input output correlations using the SVD as Σ 31 =
U 33 S 31 V 11 T . We can generalize our solutions to allow input correlations of the form Σ 11 = V
11 DV 11 T . Intuitively, this condition requires the axes of variation in the input to coincide
with the axes of variation in the input-output task, though the variances may differ. If we take D =
I then we recover the whitened case Σ 11 = I, and if we take D = Λ, then we can treat the
autoencoding case. The final fixed points of the weights are given by the best rank N 2
approximation to Σ 31 (Σ

## F MNIST pretraining experiment

We trained networks of depth 5 on the MNIST classification task with 200 hidden units per layer,
starting either from small random initial conditions with each weight drawn independently from a
Gaussian distribution with standard deviation 0.01, or from greedy layerwise pretrained initial
conditions. For the pretrained network, each layer was trained to reconstruct the output of the next
lower layer. In the finetuning stage, the network tried to predict a 10-dimensional output vector
containing a 1 in the index for the correct class, and zeros elsewhere. The network was trained
using batch gradient descent via Eqn. (13) on the 50,000 sample MNIST training dataset. Since the
network is linear, pretraining initializes the network with principal components of the input data,
and, to the extent that the consistency condition of Eqn. ( 18) holds, decouples these modes
throughout the deep network, as described in the main text.

## G Analysis of Neural Dynamics in Nonlinear Orthogonal Networks

We can derive a simple, analytical recursion relation for the propagation of neural population
variance q l , defined in (21), across layers l under the nonlinear dynamics (20). We have

due to the dynamics in (20) and the orthogonality of W (l+1,l) . Now we know that by definition, the
layer l population x l i has normalized variance q l . If we further assume that the distribution of
activity across neurons in layer l is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution, we can replace
the sum over neurons i with an integral over a zero mean unit variance Gaussian variable z:

where Dz ≡ 1 √ 2π e -1 2 z 2 dz is the standard Gaussian measure. This map from input to output
variance The map from variance in the input layer q in = q l to variance in the output layer q out =
q l+1 in (48) for g = 1 and φ(x) = tanh(x). Right: The stable fixed points of this map, q ∞ (g), as
a function of the gain g. The red curve is the analytic theory obtained by numerically solving (49).
The blue points are obtained via numerical simulations of the dynamics in (20) for networks of depth
N l = 30 with N = 1000 neurons per layer. The asymptotic population variance q ∞ is obtained by
averaging the population variance in the last 5 layers. is numerically computed for g = 1 and φ(x) =
tanh(x) in Fig. 8, left (other values of g yield a simple multiplicative scaling of this map). This
recursion relation has a stable fixed point q ∞ (g) obtained by solving the nonlinear fixed point
equation

Graphically, solving this equation corresponds to scaling the curve in Fig. 8 left by g 2 and
looking for intersections with the line of unity. For g < 1, the only solution is q ∞ = 0. For g >
1, this solution remains, but it is unstable under the recurrence (48). Instead, for g > 1, a new
stable solution appears for some nonzero value of q ∞ . The entire set of stable solutions as a
function of g is shown as the red curve in Fig. 8 right. It constitutes a theoretical prediction of
the population variance at the deepest layers of a nonlinear network as the depth goes to infinity.
It matches well for example, the empirical population variance obtained from numerical simulations
of nonlinear networks of depth 30 (blue points in Fig. 8 right).

Overall, these results indicate a dynamical phase transition in neural activity propagation through
the nonlinear network as g crosses the critical value g c = 1. When g > 1, activity propagates in a
chaotic manner, and so g = 1 constitutes the edge of chaos.
