12 Aug 2010 Xiao-Liang Qi Microsoft Research Station Q, Elings Hall University of California 93106 Santa Barbara CA USA Department of Physics Stanford University 94305 Stanford CA Shou-Cheng Zhang Department of Physics Stanford University 94305 Stanford CA Topological insulators and superconductors 12 Aug 2010 CEBFDE58FCF7572D2447ABAA301072C5 arXiv:1008.2026v1[cond-mat.mes-hall] GROBID - A machine learning software for extracting information from scholarly documents numbers: 73.20.-r 73.43.-f 85.75.-d 74.90.+n Topological insulators are new states of quantum matter which can not be adiabatically connected to conventional insulators and semiconductors. They are characterized by a full insulating gap in the bulk and gapless edge or surface states which are protected by time-reversal symmetry. These topological materials have been theoretically predicted and experimentally observed in a variety of systems, including HgTe quantum wells, BiSb alloys, and Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Se 3 crystals. We review theoretical models, materials properties and experimental results on two-dimensional and three-dimensional topological insulators, and discuss both the topological band theory and the topological field theory. Topological superconductors have a full pairing gap in the bulk and gapless surface states consisting of Majorana fermions. We review the theory of topological superconductors in close analogy to the theory of topological insulators.

Ever since the Greeks invented the concept of the atom, fundamental science has focused on finding ever smaller building blocks of matter. In the 19th century, the discovery of elements defined the golden age of chemistry. Throughout most of the 20th century, fundamental science was dominated by the search for elementary particles. In condensed matter physics, there are no new building blocks of matter to be discovered: one is dealing with the same atoms and electrons as those discovered centuries ago. Rather, one is interested in how these basic building blocks are put together to form new states of matter. Electrons and atoms in the quantum world can form many different states of matter: for example, they can form crystalline solids, magnets and superconductors. The greatest triumph of condensed matter physics in the last century is the classification of these quantum states by the principle of spontaneous symmetry breaking (Anderson, 1997) . For example, a crystalline solid breaks translation symmetry, even though the interaction among its atomic building blocks is translationally invariant. A magnet breaks rotation symmetry, even though the fundamental interactions are isotropic. A superconductor breaks the more subtle gauge symmetry, leading to novel phenomena such as flux quantization and Josephson effects. The pattern of symmetry breaking leads to a unique order parameter, which assumes a nonvanishing expectation value only in the ordered state, and a general effective field theory can be formulated based on the order parameter. The effective field theory, generally called Landau-Ginzburg theory (Landau and Lifshitz, 1980) , is determined by general properties such as dimensionality and symmetry of the order parameter, and gives a universal description of quantum states of matter.

In 1980, a new quantum state was discovered which does not fit into this simple paradigm (von Klitzing et al., 1980) . In the quantum Hall (QH) state, the bulk of the two-dimensional (2D) sample is insulating, and the electric current is carried only along the edge of the sample. The flow of this unidirectional current avoids dissipation and gives rise to a quantized Hall effect. The QH state provided the first example of a quantum state which is topologically distinct from all states of matter known before. The precise quantization of the Hall conductance is explained by the fact that it is a topological invariant, which can only take integer values in units of e 2 /h, independent of material details (Laughlin, 1981; Thouless et al., 1982) . Mathematicians have introduced the concept of topological invariance to classify different geometrical objects into broad classes. For example, 2D surfaces are classified by the number of holes in them, or genus. The surface of a perfect sphere is topologically equivalent to the surface of an ellipsoid, since these two surfaces can be smoothly deformed into each other without creating any holes. Similarly, a coffee cup is topologically equivalent to a donut, since both of them contain a single hole. In mathematics, topological classification discards small details and focuses on the fundamental distinction of shapes. In physics, precisely quantized physical quantities such as the Hall conductance also have a topological origin, and remain unchanged by small changes in the sample.

It is obvious that the link between physics and topology should be more general than the specific case of QH states. The key concept is that of a "smooth deformation". In mathematics, one considers smooth deformations of shapes without the violent action of creating a hole in the deformation process. The operation of smooth deformation groups shapes into topological equivalence classes. In physics, one can consider general Hamiltonians of many-particle systems with an energy gap separating the ground state from the excited states.

In this case, one can define a smooth deformation as a change in the Hamiltonian which does not close the bulk gap. This topological concept can be applied to both insulators and superconductors with a full energy gap, which are the focus of this review article. It cannot be applied to gapless states such as metals, doped semiconductors, or nodal superconductors. According to this general definition, if we put in contact two quantum states belonging to the same topological class, the interface between them does not need to support gapless states. On the other hand, if we put in contact two quantum states belonging to different topological classes, or put a topologically nontrivial state in contact with the vacuum, the interface must support gapless states.

From these simple arguments, we immediately see that the abstract concept of topological classification can be applied to condensed matter system with an energy gap, where the notion of a smooth deformation can be defined (Zhang, 2008) . Further progress can be made through the concepts of topological order parameter and topological field theory (TFT), which are powerful tools describing topological states of quantum matter. Mathematicians have expressed the intuitive concept of genus in terms of an integral, called topological invariant, over the local curvature of the surface (Nakahara, 1990) . Whereas the integrand depends on details of the surface geometry, the value of the integral is independent of such details and depends only on the global topology. In physics, topologically quantized physical quantities can be similarly expressed as invariant integrals over the frequency-momentum space (Thouless, 1998; Thouless et al., 1982) . Such quantities can serve as a topological order parameter which uniquely determines the nature of the quantum state. Furthermore, the long-wavelength and low-energy physics can be completely described by a TFT, leading to powerful predictions of experimentally measurable topological effects (Zhang, 1992) . Topological order parameters and TFTs for topological quantum states play the role of conventional symmetry-breaking order parameters and effective field theories for broken-symmetry states.

The QH states belong to a topological class which explicitly breaks time-reversal (TR) symmetry, for example, by the presence of a magnetic field. In recent years, a new topological class of materials has been theoretically predicted and experimentally observed (Bernevig et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2009; Fu et al., 2007; Hsieh et al., 2008; König et al., 2007; Xia et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009) . These new quantum states belong to a class which is invariant under TR, and where spin-orbit coupling (SOC) plays an essential role. Some important concepts were developed in earlier works (Bernevig and Zhang, 2006; Haldane, 1988; Kane and Mele, 2005; Murakami et al., 2003 Murakami et al., , 2004;; Sinova et al., 2004; Zhang and Hu, 2001) , culminating in the construction of the topological band theory (TBT) and the TFT of 2D and 3D topological insulators (Fu and Kane, 2007; Fu et al., 2007; Kane and Mele, 2005; Moore and Balents, 2007; Qi et al., 2008; Roy, 2009) . All TR invariant insulators in nature (without ground state degeneracy) fall into two distinct classes, classified by a Z 2 topological order parameter. The topologically nontrivial state has a full insulating gap in the bulk, but has gapless edge or surface states consisting of an odd number of Dirac fermions. The topological property manifests itself more dramatically when TR symmetry is preserved in the bulk but broken on the surface, in which case the material is fully insulating both inside the bulk and on the surface. In this case, Maxwell's laws of electrodynamics are dramatically altered by a topological term with a precisely quantized coefficient, similar to the case of the QH effect. The 2D topological insulator, synonymously called the quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator, was first theoretically predicted in 2006 (Bernevig et al., 2006) and experimentally observed (König et al., 2007; Roth et al., 2009) in HgTe/CdTe quantum wells (QW). A topologically trivial insulator state is realized when the thickness of the QW is less than a critical value, and the topologically nontrivial state is obtained when that thickness exceeds the critical value. In the topologically nontrivial state, there is a pair of edge states with opposite spins propagating in opposite directions. Four-terminal measurements (König et al., 2007) show that the longitudinal conductance in the QSH regime is quantized to 2e 2 /h, independently of the width of the sample. Subsequent nonlocal transport measurements (Roth et al., 2009) confirm the edge state transport as predicted by theory. The first discovery of the QSH topological insulator in HgTe was ranked by Science Magazine as one of the top ten breakthroughs among all sciences in year 2007, and the subject quickly became mainstream in condensed matter physics (Day, 2008) . The 3D topological insulator was predicted in the Bi 1-x Sb x alloy within a certain range of compositions x (Fu and Kane, 2007) , and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements soon observed an odd number of topologically nontrivial surface states (Hsieh et al., 2008) . Simpler versions of the 3D topological insulator were theoretically predicted in Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 (Zhang et al., 2009) and Bi 2 Se 3 (Xia et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009) compounds with a large bulk gap and a gapless surface state consisting of a single Dirac cone. ARPES experiments indeed observed the linear dispersion relation of these surface states (Chen et al., 2009; Xia et al., 2009) . These pioneering theoretical and experimental works opened up the exciting field of topological insulators, and the field is now expanding at a rapid pace (Hasan and Kane, 2010; Kane, 2008; König et al., 2008; Moore, 2009; Qi and Zhang, 2010; Zhang, 2008) . Beyond the topological materials mentioned above, more than fifty new compounds have been predicted to be topological insulators (Chadov et al., 2010; Franz, 2010; Lin et al., 2010; Yan et al., 2010) , and two of them have been experimentally observed recently (Chen et al., 2010; Sato et al., 2010) . This collective body of work establishes beyond any reasonable doubt the ubiquitous existence in nature of this new topo-FIG. 1 Analogy between QH and QSH effects: (a) A spinless 1D system has both forward and backward movers. These two basic degrees of freedom are spatially separated in a QH bar, as expressed by the symbolic equation "2 = 1 + 1". The upper edge supports only a forward mover and the lower edge supports only a backward mover. The states are robust and go around an impurity without scattering. (b) A spinful 1D system has four basic degrees of freedom, which are spatially separated in a QSH bar. The upper edge supports a forward mover with spin up and a backward mover with spin down, and conversely for the lower edge. That spatial separation is expressed by the symbolic equation "4 = 2 + 2". Adapted from Qi and Zhang, 2010. logical state of quantum matter. It is remarkable that such topological effects can be realized in common materials, previously used for infrared detection or thermoelectric applications, without requiring extreme conditions such as high magnetic fields or low temperatures. The discovery of topological insulators has undoubtedly had a dramatic impact on the field of condensed matter physics.

After briefly reviewing the history of the theoretical prediction and the experimental observation of the topological materials in nature, we now turn to the history of the conceptual developments, and retrace the intertwined paths taken by theorists. An important step was taken in 1988 by Haldane (Haldane, 1988) , who borrowed the concept of the parity anomaly (Redlich, 1984; Semenoff, 1984) in quantum electrodynamics to construct a theoretical model of the QH state on the 2D honeycomb lattice. This model does not require an external magnetic field nor the associated orbital quantization and Landau levels (LLs). However, it is in the same topological class as the ordinary QH states, and requires both two dimensionality and the breaking of the TR symmetry. There was a misconception at the time that topological quantum states could only exist under these conditions. Another important step was the construction in 1989 of a TFT of the QH effect based on the Chern-Simons (CS) term (Zhang, 1992) . This theory captures the most important topological aspects of the QH effect in a single and unified effective field theory. At this point, the path towards generalizing the QH states became clear: since the CS term can exist in all even spatial dimensions, the topological physics of the QH states can be generalized to such dimensions. However, it was un-clear at the time what kind of microscopic interactions could be responsible for these topological states. In 2001, Zhang and Hu (Zhang and Hu, 2001) explicitly constructed a microscopic model for the generalization of the QH state in 4D. A crucial ingredient of this model is its invariance under TR symmetry, in sharp contrast to the QH state in 2D which explicitly breaks TR symmetry. This fact can also be seen directly from the CS effective action in 4 + 1 spacetime dimensions, which is invariant under TR symmetry. With this generalization of the QH state, two basic obstacles, the breaking of TR symmetry and the restriction to 2D, were removed. Partly because of the mathematical complexity involved in this work, it was not appreciated by the general community at the timebut is clear now -that this state is the root state from which all TR invariant topological insulators in 3D and 2D are derived (Qi et al., 2008) . TR invariant topological insulators can be classified in the form of a family tree, where the 4D state is the "grandfather" state and begets exactly two generations of descendants, the 3D and 2D topological insulators, by the procedure of dimensional reduction (Kitaev, 2009; Qi et al., 2008; Ryu et al., 2010; Schnyder et al., 2008) .

Motivated by the construction of a TR invariant topological state, theorists started to look for a physical realization of this new topological class, and discovered the intrinsic spin Hall effect (Murakami et al., 2003 (Murakami et al., , 2004;; Sinova et al., 2004) . Murakami et al. (Murakami et al., 2003) state their motivation clearly in the introduction: "Recently, the QH effect has been generalized to four spatial dimensions [...] . The QH response in that system is physically realized through the SOC in a TR symmetric system". Soon after, it was realized in 2004 that the two key ideas, TR symmetry and SOC, can also be applied to insulators as well, leading to the concept of spin Hall insulator (Murakami et al., 2004) . The spin Hall effect in insulators is dissipationless, similarly to the QH effect. The concept of spin Hall insulator motivated Kane and Mele in 2005 to investigate the QSH effect in graphene (Kane and Mele, 2005) , a material first discovered experimentally that same year. Working independently, Bernevig and Zhang studied the QSH effect in strained semiconductors, where SOC generates LLs without the breaking of TR symmetry (Bernevig and Zhang, 2006) . Unfortunately the energy gap in graphene caused by the intrinsic SOC is insignificantly small (Min et al., 2006; Yao et al., 2007) . Even though neither models have been experimentally realized, they played important roles for the conceptual developments. In 2006, Bernevig, Hughes and Zhang (Bernevig et al., 2006) successfully predicted the first topological insulator to be realized in HgTe/CdTe QWs.

The QSH state in 2D can be roughly understood as two copies of the QH state, where states with opposite spin counter-propagate at the edge. A natural question arises as to whether the edge states of the QSH state are stable. In a deeply insightful paper (Kane and Mele, 2005) , Kane and Mele showed in 2005 that the stability depends on the number of pairs of edge states. An odd number of pairs is stable, whereas an even number of pairs is not. This observation led Kane and Mele to propose a Z 2 classification of TR invariant 2D insulators. In addition, they devised a precise algorithm for the computation of a Z 2 topological invariant within TBT. TBT was soon extended to 3D by Fu, Kane and Mele, Moore and Balents and Roy (Fu and Kane, 2007; Fu et al., 2007; Moore and Balents, 2007; Roy, 2009) , where sixteen topologically distinct states are possible. Most of these states can be viewed as stacked 2D QSH insulator planes, but one of them, the strong topological insulator, is genuinely 3D. The topological classification according to TBT is only valid for noninteracting systems, and it was not clear at the time whether these states are stable under more general topological deformations including interactions. Qi, Hughes and Zhang introduced the TFT of topological insulators (Qi et al., 2008) , and demonstrated that these states are indeed generally stable in the presence of interactions. Furthermore, a topologically invariant topological order parameter can be defined within the TFT as a experimentally measurable, quantized topological magnetoelectric effect. The standard Maxwell's equations are modified by the topological terms, leading to the axion electrodynamics of the topological insulators. This work also showed that the 2D and 3D topological insulators are descendants of the 4D topological insulator state discovered in 2001 (Zhang and Hu, 2001) , and motivated this series of recent developments. At this point, the two different paths based on the TBT and TFT converged, and an unified theoretical framework emerged.

There are a number of excellent reviews on this subject (Hasan and Kane, 2010; König et al., 2008; Moore, 2009; Qi and Zhang, 2010) . This article attempts to give a simple pedagogical introduction to the subject and reviews the current status of the field. In Sec. II and Sec. III, we review the standard models, materials and experiments for the 2D and the 3D topological insulators. These two sections can be understood without any prior knowledge of topology. In Sec. IV, we review the general theory of topological insulators, presenting both the TFT and the TBT. In Sec. V, we discuss an important generalization of topological insulators-topological superconductors.

The QSH state, or the 2D topological insulator was first discovered in the HgTe/CdTe quantum wells. Bernevig, Hughes and Zhang (Bernevig et al., 2006) initiated the search for the QSH state in semiconductors with an "inverted" electronic gap, and predicted a quantum phase transition in HgTe/CdTe quantum wells as a function of the thickness d QW of the quantum well. The quantum well system is predicted to be a conventional insulator for d QW &lt; d c , and a QSH insulator with a single pair of helical edge states for d QW &gt; d c , where d c is a critical thickness. The first experimental confirmation of the existence of the QSH state in HgTe/CdTe quantum wells was carried out by König et al. (König et al., 2007) . This work reports the observation of a nominally insulating state which conducts only through 1D edge channels, and is strongly in-fluenced by a TR symmetry-breaking magnetic field. Further transport measurements (Roth et al., 2009) reported unique nonlocal conduction properties due to the helical edge states.

The QSH insulator state is invariant under TR, has a charge excitation gap in the 2D bulk, but has topologically protected 1D gapless edge states that lie inside the bulk insulating gap. The edge states have a distinct helical property: two states with opposite spin polarization counterpropagate at a given edge (Kane and Mele, 2005; Wu et al., 2006; Xu and Moore, 2006) . For this reason, they are also called helical edge states, i.e. the spin is correlated with the direction of motion (Wu et al., 2006) . The edge states come in Kramers doublets, and TR symmetry ensures the crossing of their energy levels at special points in the Brillouin zone. Because of this level crossing, the spectrum of a QSH insulator cannot be adiabatically deformed into that of a topologically trivial insulator without helical edge states. Therefore, in this precise sense, the QSH insulator represents a new topologically distinct state of matter. In the special case that SOC preserves a U (1) s subgroup of the full SU (2) spin rotation group, the topological properties of the QSH state can be characterized by the spin Chern number (Sheng et al., 2006) . More generally, the topological properties of the QSH state are mathematically characterized by a Z 2 topological invariant (Kane and Mele, 2005) . States with an even number of Kramers pairs of edge states at a given edge are topologically trivial, while those with an odd number are topologically nontrivial. The Z 2 topological quantum number can also be defined for generally interacting systems and experimentally measured in terms of the fractional charge and quantized current on the edge (Qi et al., 2008) , and spin-charge separation in the bulk (Qi and Zhang, 2008; Ran et al., 2008) .

In this section, we shall focus on the basic theory of the QSH state in the HgTe/CdTe system because of its simplicity and experimental relevance, and provide an explicit and pedagogical discussion of the helical edge states and their transport properties. There are several other theoretical proposals for the QSH state, including bilayer bismuth (Murakami, 2006) , and the "broken-gap" type-II AlSb/InAs/GaSb quantum wells (Liu et al., 2008) . Initial experiments in the AlSb/InAs/GaSb system already show encouraging signatures (Knez et al., 2010) . The QSH system has also been proposed for the transition metal oxide Na 2 IrO 3 (Shitade et al., 2009) . The concept of fractional QSH state was proposed at the same time as the QSH (Bernevig and Zhang, 2006) , and has been investigated theoretically in more details recently (Levin and Stern, 2009; Young et al., 2008) .

In this section we review the basic electronic structure of bulk HgTe and CdTe, and present a simple model first introduced by Bernevig, Hughes and Zhang (Bernevig et al., FIG. 2 (a) Bulk band structure of HgTe and CdTe; (b) schematic picture of quantum well geometry and lowest subbands for two different thicknesses. From Bernevig et al., 2006. 2006) (BHZ) to describe the physics of those subbands of HgTe/CdTe quantum wells that are relevant for the QSH effect. HgTe and CdTe crystallize in the zincblende lattice structure. This structure has the same geometry as the diamond lattice, i.e. two interpenetrating face-centered-cubic lattices shifted along the body diagonal, but with a different atom on each sublattice. The presence of two different atoms per lattice site breaks inversion symmetry, and thus reduces the point group symmetry from O h (cubic) to T d (tetrahedral). However, even though inversion symmetry is explicitly broken, this only has a small effect on the physics of the QSH effect. To simplify the discussion, we shall first ignore this bulk inversion asymmetry (BIA).

For both HgTe and CdTe, the important bands near the Fermi level are close to the Γ point in the Brillouin zone [Fig. 2(a) ]. They are a s-type band (Γ 6 ), and a p-type band split by SOC into a J = 3/2 band (Γ 8 ) and a J = 1/2 band (Γ 7 ). CdTe has a band ordering similar to GaAs with a stype (Γ 6 ) conduction band, and p-type valence bands (Γ 8 , Γ 7 ) which are separated from the conduction band by a large energy gap (∼ 1.6 eV). Because of the large SOC present in the heavy element Hg, the usual band ordering is inverted: the negative energy gap of -300 meV indicates that the Γ 8 band, which usually forms the valence band, is above the Γ 6 band. The light-hole Γ 8 band becomes the conduction band, the heavy-hole band becomes the first valence band, and the s-type band (Γ 6 ) is pushed below the Fermi level to lie between the heavy-hole band and the spin-orbit split-off band (Γ 7 ) [Fig. 2(a) ]. Due to the degeneracy between heavy-hole and light-hole bands at the Γ point, HgTe is a zero-gap semiconductor.

When HgTe-based quantum well structures are grown, the peculiar properties of the well material can be utilized to tune the electronic structure. For wide QW layers, quantum confinement is weak and the band structure remains "inverted".

FIG. 3 Energy levels of the QW as a function of QW width. From König et al., 2008. However, the confinement energy increases when the well width is reduced. Thus, the energy levels will be shifted and, eventually, the energy bands will be aligned in a "normal" way, if the QW thickness d QW falls below a critical thickness d c . We can understand this heuristically as follows: for thin QWs the heterostructure should behave similarly to CdTe and have a normal band ordering, i.e. the bands with primarily Γ 6 symmetry are the conduction subbands and the Γ 8 bands contribute to the valence subbands. On the other hand, as d QW is increased, we expect the material to behave more like HgTe which has inverted bands. As d QW increases, we expect to reach a critical thickness where the Γ 8 and Γ 6 subbands cross and become inverted, with the Γ 8 bands becoming conduction subbands and the Γ 6 bands becoming valence subbands [Fig. 2(b) ] (Bernevig et al., 2006; Novik et al., 2005) . The shift of energy levels with d QW is depicted in Fig. 3 . The QW states derived from the heavy-hole Γ 8 band are denoted by H n , where the subscript n = 1, 2, 3, . . . describes well states with increasing number of nodes in the z direction. Similarly, the QW states derived from the electron Γ 6 band are denoted by E n . The inversion between E 1 and H 1 bands occurs at a critical thickness d QW = d c ∼ 6.3 nm [Fig. 3 ]. In the following, we develop a simple model and discuss why we expect QWs with d QW &gt; d c to form TR invariant 2D topological insulators with protected edge states.

Under our assumption of inversion symmetry, the relevant subbands, E 1 and H 1 , must be doubly degenerate since TR symmetry is present. We express states in the basis

where |E 1 ± and |H 1 ± are two sets of Kramers partners. The states |E 1 ± and |H 1 ± have opposite parity, hence a Hamiltonian matrix element that connects them must be odd under parity. Thus, to lowest order in k, (|E 1 + , |H 1 + ) and (|E 1 -, |H 1 -) will each be coupled generically via a term linear in k. The |H 1 + heavyhole state is formed from the spin-orbit coupled p-orbitals |p x +ip y , ↑ , while the |H 1heavy-hole state is formed from the spin-orbit coupled p-orbitals | -(p xip y ), ↓ . Therefore, to preserve rotation symmetry around the growth axis z, the matrix elements must by proportional to k ± = k x ± ik y . The only terms allowed in the diagonal elements are terms that have even powers of k including k-independent terms. The subbands must come in degenerate pairs at each k, so there can be no matrix elements between the + state and thestate of the same band. Finally, if there are nonzero matrix elements between |E 1 + , |H 1or |E 1 -, |H 1 + , this would induce a higher-order process coupling the ± states of the same band and splitting the degeneracy. Therefore, these matrix elements are forbidden as well. These simple arguments led to the following model,

where I 2×2 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, and

where A, B, C, D, M are material parameters that depend on the QW geometry, and we choose the zero of energy to be the valence band edge of HgTe at k = 0 [Fig. 2 ].

The bulk energy spectrum of the BHZ model is given by

For B = 0, the model reduces to two copies of the massive Dirac Hamiltonian in (2 + 1)D. The mass M corresponds to the energy difference between the E 1 and H 1 levels at the Γ point. The mass M changes sign at the critical thickness d c , where E 1 and H 1 become degenerate. At the critical point, the system is described by two copies of the massless Dirac Hamiltonian, one for each spin, and at a single valley k = 0. This situation is similar to graphene (Castro Neto et al., 2009) , which is also described by the massless Dirac Hamiltonian in (2 + 1)D. However, the crucial difference lies in the fact that graphene has four Dirac cones, consisting of two valleys and two spins, whereas we have two Dirac cones, one for each spin, and at a single valley. For d QW &gt; d c , the E 1 level falls below the H 1 level at the Γ point, and the mass M becomes negative. A pure massive Dirac model does not differentiate between a positive or negative mass M . Since we are dealing with a nonrelativistic system, the B term is generally allowed. In order to make the distinction clear, we call M the Dirac mass, and B the Newtonian mass, since it describes the usual nonrelativistic mass term with quadratic dispersion relation. We shall show later that the relative sign between the Dirac mass M and the Newtonian mass B is crucial to determine whether the model describes a topological insulator state with protected edge states or not. HgTe has a crystal structure of the zincblende type which lacks inversion symmetry, leading to a BIA term in the Hamil- tonian, given to leading order by (König et al., 2008 )

This term plays an important role in determining the spin orientation of the helical edge state. The topological phase transition in the presence of BIA has been investigated recently (König et al., 2008; Murakami et al., 2007) . In addition, in an asymmetric QW structural inversion symmetry can be broken by a build-in electric field, leading to a SOC term of Rashba type in the effective Hamiltonian (Rothe et al., 2010; Ström et al., 2010) . For simplicity, we will focus on symmetric QW witout SIA. In Table I , we give the parameters of the BHZ model for various values of d QW .

For the purposes of studying the topological properties of this system, as well as the edge states, it is sometimes convenient to work with a lattice regularization of the continuum model (1) which gives the energy spectrum over the entire Brillouin zone, i.e. a tight-binding representation. Since all the interesting physics at low energy occurs near the Γ point, the behavior of the dispersion at energies much larger than the bulk gap at the Γ point is not important. Thus, we can choose a regularization to simplify our calculations. This simplified lattice model consists of replacing (3) by

It is clear that near the Γ point, the lattice Hamiltonian reduces to the continuum BHZ model in Eq. (1). For simplicity, below we work in units where the lattice constant a = 1.

The existence of topologically protected edge states is an important property of the QSH insulator. The edge states can be obtained by solving the BHZ model ( 2 ) with an open boundary condition. Consider the model Hamiltonian (2) defined on the half-space x &gt; 0 in the xy plane. We can divide the model Hamiltonian into two parts, Ĥ = H0 + H1 , (8)

x . All k xdependent terms are included in H0 . For such a semi-infinite system, k x needs to be replaced by the operator -i∂ x . On the other hand, translation symmetry along the y direction is preserved, so that k y is a good quantum number. For k y = 0, we have H1 = 0 and the wave equation is given by

Since H0 is block-diagonal, the eigenstates have the form

where 0 is a two-component zero vector, and Ψ ↑ (x) is related to Ψ ↓ (x) by TR. For the edge states, the wave function ψ 0 (x) is localized at the edge and satisfies the wave equation

which has been solved analytically for open boundary conditions using different methods (König et al., 2008; Linder et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2008) . In order to show the existence of the edge states and to find the region where the edge states exist, we briefly review the derivation of the explicit form of the edge states by neglecting ǫ for simplicity (König et al., 2008) . Neglecting ǫ, the wave equation ( 12 ) has particle-hole symmetry. Therefore, we expect that a special edge state with E = 0 can exist. With the wave function ansatz ψ 0 = φe λx , the above equation can be simplified to

therefore the two-component wave function φ should be an eigenstate of the Pauli matrix τ y . Defining a two-component spinor φ ± by τ y φ ± = ±φ ± , Eq. ( 13 ) is simplified to a quadratic equation for λ. If λ is a solution for φ + , then -λ is a solution for φ -. Consequently, the general solution is given by

where λ 1,2 satisfy

The coefficients a, b, c, d can be determined by imposing the open boundary condition ψ(0) = 0. Together with the normalizability of the wave function in the region x &gt; 0, the open boundary condition leads to an existence condition for the edge states: ℜλ 1,2 &lt; 0 (c = d = 0) or ℜλ 1,2 &gt; 0 (a = b = 0), where ℜ stands for the real part. As seen from Eq. ( 15 ), these conditions can only be satisfied in the inverted regime when M/B &gt; 0. Furthermore, one can show that when A/B &lt; 0, we have ℜλ 1,2 &lt; 0, while when A/B &gt; 0, we have ℜλ 1,2 &gt; 0. Therefore, the wave function for the edge states at the Γ point is given by

The sign of A/B determines the spin polarization of the edge states, which is key to determine the helicity of the Dirac Hamiltonian for the topological edge states. Another important quantity characterizing the edge states is their decay length, which is defined as

The effective edge model can be obtained by projecting the bulk Hamiltonian onto the edge states Ψ ↑ and Ψ ↓ defined in Eq. ( 11 ). This procedure leads to a 2 × 2 effective Hamiltonian defined by H αβ edge (k y ) = Ψ α | H0 + H1 |Ψ β . To leading order in k y , we arrive at the effective Hamiltonian for the helical edge states:

For HgTe QWs, we have A ≃ 3.6 eV• Å (König et al., 2008) , and the Dirac velocity of the edge states is given by v = A/ ≃ 5.5 × 10 5 m/s. The analytical calculation above can be confirmed by exact numerical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian (2) on a strip of finite width, which can also include the contribution of the ǫ(k) term [Fig. 4 ]. The finite decay length of the helical edge states into the bulk determines the amplitude for interedge tunneling (Hou et al., 2009; Ström and Johannesson, 2009; Tanaka et al., 2009; Teo and Kane, 2009; Zhou et al., 2008; Zyuzin and Fiete, 2010) .

From the explicit analytical solution of the BHZ model, there is a pair of helical edge states exponentially localized at the edge, and described by the effective helical edge theory (17). In this context, the concept of "helical" edge state (Wu et al., 2006) refers to the fact that states with opposite spin counter-propagate at a given edge, as we see from the edge state dispersion relation shown in Fig. 4(b) , or the real space picture shown in Fig. 1 (b) . This is in sharp contrast to the "chiral" edge states in the QH state, where the edge states propagate in one direction only, as shown in Fig. 1(a ). 2 ) in a cylinder geometry. In a thin QW, (a) there is a gap between conduction band and valence band. In a thick QW, (b) there are gapless edge states on the left and right edge (red and blue lines, respectively). The dashed line stands for a typical value of the chemical potential within the bulk gap. Adapted from Qi and Zhang, 2010. In the QH effect, the chiral edge states can not be backscattered for sample widths larger than the decay length of the edge states. In the QSH effect, one may naturally ask whether backscattering of the helical edge states is possible. It turns out that TR symmetry prevents the helical edge states from backscattering. The absence of backscattering relies on the destructive interference between all possible backscattering paths taken by the edge electrons.

Before giving a semiclassical argument why this is so, we first consider an analogy from daily experience. Most eyeglasses and camera lenses have an antireflective coating [Fig. 5(a) ], where light reflected from the top and bottom surfaces interfere destructively, leading to no net reflection and thus perfect transmission. However, this effect is not robust, as it depends on a precise matching between the wavelength of light and the thickness of the coating. Now we turn to the helical edge states. If a nonmagnetic impurity is present near the edge, it can in principle cause backscattering of the helical edge states due to SOC. However, just as for the reflection of photons by a surface, an electron can be reflected by a nonmagnetic impurity, and different reflection paths interfere quantum-mechanically. A forward-moving electron with spin up on the QSH edge can make either a clockwise or a counterclockwise turn around the impurity [Fig. 5 The electron spin rotates by 180 • clockwise along the blue curve, and counterclockwise along the red curve. A geometrical phase factor associated with this rotation of the spin leads to destructive interference between the two paths. In other words, electron backscattering on the QSH edge is suppressed in a way similar to how the reflection of photons is suppressed by an antireflective coating. Adapted from Qi and Zhang, 2010. paths differ by a full π -(-π) = 2π rotation of the electron spin. However, the wave function of a spin-1/2 particle picks up a negative sign under a full 2π rotation. Therefore, two backscattering paths related by TR always interfere destructively, leading to perfect transmission. If the impurity carries a magnetic moment, TR symmetry is explicitly broken, and the two reflected waves no longer interfere destructively. In this way, the robustness of the QSH edge state is protected by TR symmetry.

The physical picture described above applies only to the case of a single pair of QSH edge states (Kane and Mele, 2005; Wu et al., 2006; Xu and Moore, 2006) . If there are two forward-movers and two backward-movers on a given edge, an electron can be scattered from a forward-moving to a backward-moving channel without reversing its spin. This spoils the perfect destructive interference described above, and leads to dissipation. Consequently, for the QSH state to be robust, edge states must consist of an odd number of forward (backward) movers. This even-odd effect is the key reason why the QSH insulator is characterized by a Z 2 topological quantum number (Kane and Mele, 2005; Wu et al., 2006; Xu and Moore, 2006) .

The general properties of TR symmetry are important for understanding the properties of the edge theory. The antiunitary TR operator T takes different forms depending on whether the degrees of freedom have integer or half-oddinteger spin. For half-odd-integer spin, we have T 2 = -1 which implies, by Kramers' theorem, that any single-particle eigenstate of the Hamiltonian must have a degenerate partner. From Fig. 4 (b), we see that the two dispersion branches at one given edge cross each other at the TR invariant k = 0 point. At this point, these two degenerate states exactly satisfy Kramers' theorem. If we add TR invariant perturbations to the Hamiltonian, we can move the degenerate point up and down in energy, but cannot remove the degeneracy. In this precise sense, the helical edge states are topologically protected by TR symmetry.

If TR symmetry is not present, a simple "mass" term can be added to the Hamiltonian so that the spectrum becomes gapped:

where h.c. denotes Hermitian conjugation, and ψ † k± , ψ k± are creation/annihilation operators for an edge electron of momentum k, with ± denoting the electron spin. The action of TR symmetry on the electron operators is given by

which implies

Consequently, H mass is a TR symmetry breaking perturbation. More generally, if we define the "chirality" operator

any operator that changes C by 2(2n -1), n ∈ Z is odd under TR. In other words, TR symmetry only allows 2n-particle backscattering, described by operators such as ψ † k+ ψ † k ′ + ψ p-ψ p ′ -(for n = 1). Therefore, the most relevant perturbation ψ † k+ ψ k ′ -is forbidden by TR symmetry, which is essential for the topological stability of the edge states. This edge state effective theory is nonchiral, and is qualitatively different from the usual spinless or spinful Luttinger liquid theories. It can be considered as a new class of 1D critical theories, dubbed a "helical liquid" (Wu et al., 2006) . Specifically, in the noninteracting case no TR invariant perturbation is available to induce backscattering, so that the edge state is robust.

Consider now the case of two flavors of helical edge states on the boundary, i.e. a 1D system consisting of two leftmovers and two right-movers with Hamiltonian

A mass term such as m dk 2π ψ † k1+ ψ k2-ψ † k1-ψ k2+ + h.c. (with m real) can open a gap in the system while preserving time-reversal symmetry. In other words, two copies of the helical liquid form a a topologically trivial theory. More generally, an edge system with TR symmetry is a nontrivial helical liquid when there is an odd number of left-(right-) movers, and trivial when there is an even number of them. Thus the topology of QSH systems are characterized by a Z 2 topological quantum number.

We now review the effect of interactions and quenched disorder on the QSH edge liquid (Wu et al., 2006; Xu and Moore, 2006) . Only two TR invariant nonchiral interactions can be added to Eq. 17, the forward and Umklapp scatterings

where the two-particle operators ψ † ψ † , ψψ are point-split with the lattice constant a which plays the role of a shortdistance cutoff.

where v = v 2g 2 is the renormalized velocity, and we define nonchiral bosons φ = φ R + φ L and θ = φ Rφ L , respectively, where φ R and φ L are chiral bosons describing the spin up (down) right-mover and the spin down (up) left-mover, respectively. φ contains both spin and charge degrees of freedom, and is equivalent to the combination φ cθ s in the spinful Luttinger liquid, with φ c and θ s the charge and spin bosons, respectively (Giamarchi, 2003) . It is also a compact variable with period √ π. A renormalization group analysis shows that the Umklapp term is relevant for K &lt; 1/2 with a pinned value of φ. Consequently, a gap ∆ ∼ a -1 (g u ) 1 2-4K opens and spin transport is blocked. The mass order parameters N x,y the bosonized form of which is

, are odd under TR. For g u &lt; 0, φ is pinned at either 0 or √ π/2, and the N y order is Ising-like. At T = 0, the system is in a Ising ordered phase, and TR symmetry is spontaneously broken. On the other hand, when 0 &lt; T ≪ ∆, N y is disordered, the gap remains, and TR symmetry is restored by thermal fluctuations. A similar reasoning applies to the case g u &gt; 0 where N x is the order parameter.

There is also the possibility of two-particle backscattering due to quenched disorder, described by the term

where the scattering strength g u (x) and phase α(x) are Gaussian random variables.

The standard replica analysis shows that disorder becomes relevant at K &lt; 3/8 (Giamarchi and Schulz, 1988; Wu et al., 2006; Xu and Moore, 2006) . At T = 0, N x,y (x) exhibits glassy behavior, i.e. disordered in the spatial direction but static in the time direction. Spin transport is thus blocked and TR symmetry is again spontaneously broken at T = 0. At low but finite T , the system remains gapped with TR symmetry restored.

In the above, we have seen that the helical liquid can in principle be destroyed. However, for a reasonably weak interacting system, i.e. K ≈ 1, the one-component helical liquid remains gapless. In an Ising ordered phase, the low-energy excitations on the edge are Ising domain walls which carry fractional e/2 charge (Qi et al., 2008) . The properties of multicomponent helical liquids in the presence of disorder has also been studied (Xu and Moore, 2006) .

A magnetic impurity on the edge of a QSH insulator is expected to act as a local mass term for the edge theory, and thus is expected to lead to a suppression of the edge conductance. While this is certainly true for a static magnetic impurity, a quantum magnetic impurity, i.e. a Kondo impurity, leads to subtler behavior (Maciejko et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2006) . In the presence of a quantum magnetic impurity, due to the combined effects of interactions and SOC one must also generally consider local two-particle backscattering processes (Meidan and Oreg, 2005) similar to Eq. ( 20 ), but occurring only at the position of the impurity. At high temperatures, both weak Kondo and weak two-particle backscattering are expected to give rise to a logarithmic temperature dependence as in the usual Kondo effect (Maciejko et al., 2009) , and their effect is not easily distinguishable. However, at low temperatures the physics depends drastically on the strength of Coulomb interactions on the edge, parameterized by the Luttinger parameter K. For weak Coulomb interactions K &gt; 1/4, the edge conductance is restored to the unitarity limit 2e 2 /h with unusual power laws characteristic of a "local helical liquid" (Maciejko et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2006) . For strong Coulomb interactions K &lt; 1/4, the conductance vanishes at T = 0, but is restored at low T by a fractionalized tunneling current of charge e/2 quasiparticles (Maciejko et al., 2009) . The tunneling of a charge e/2 quasiparticle is described by an instanton process which is the time counterpart to the static e/2 charge on a spatial magnetic domain wall along the edge (Qi et al., 2008) . In addition to the single-channel Kondo effect just described, the possibility of an even more exotic two-channel Kondo effect on the edge of the QSH insulator has also been studied recently (Law et al., 2010) .

There is an alternative way to understand the qualitative difference between an even and odd number of edge states in terms of a "fermion doubling" theorem (Wu et al., 2006) . This theorem states that there is always an even number of Kramers pairs at the Fermi energy for a TR invariant, but

Energy dispersion of a 1D TR invariant system. The Kramers degeneracy is required at k = 0 and k = π, so that the energy spectrum always crosses 4n times the Fermi level ǫF . (b) Energy dispersion of the helical edge states on one boundary of the QSH system (solid lines). At k = 0 the edge states are Kramers partners, while at k = π they merge into the bulk and pair with the edge states of the other boundary (dash lines). In both (a) and (b), red and blue lines represent the two partners of a Kramers pair.

From König et al., 2008. otherwise arbitrary 1D band structure. A single pair of helical states can occur only "holograhically", i.e. when the 1D system is the boundary of a 2D system. This fermion doubling theorem is a TR invariant generalization of the Nielsen-Ninomiya no-go theorem for chiral fermions on a lattice (Nielsen and Ninomiya, 1981) . For spinless fermions, there is always an equal number of left-movers and rightmovers at the Fermi level, which leads to the fermion doubling problem in odd spatial dimensions. A geometrical way to understand this result is that for periodic functions (i.e. energy spectra of a lattice model), "what goes up must eventually come down". Similarly, for a TR symmetric system with halfodd-integer spins, Kramers' theorem requires that each eigenstate of the Hamiltonian is accompanied by its TR conjugate or Kramers partner, so that the number of low-energy channels is doubled. A Kramers pair of states at k = 0 must recombine into pairs when k goes from 0 to π and 2π, which requires the bands to cross the Fermi level 4n times [Fig. 6(a) ]. However, there is an exception to this theorem, which is analogous to the reason why a chiral liquid can exist in the QH effect. A helical liquid with an odd number of fermion branches can occur if it is holographic, i.e. if it appears at the boundary (edge) of a 2D system. In this case, the edge states are Kramers partners at k = 0, but merge into the bulk at some finite k c , such that they do not have to be combined at k = π. More accurately, the edge states on both left and right boundaries becomes bulk states for k &gt; k c and form a Kramers pair [Fig. 6(b) ]. This is exactly the behavior discussed in Sec. II.B in the context of the analytical solution the edge state wave functions.

The fermion doubling theorem also provides a physical understanding of the topological stability of the helical liquid. Any local perturbation on the boundary of a 2D QSH system is equivalent to the action of coupling a "dirty surface layer" to the unperturbed helical edge states. Whatever perturbation is considered, the "dirty surface layer" is always 1D, such that there is always an even number of Kramers pairs of low-energy channels. Since the helical liquid has only an odd number of Kramers pairs, the coupling between them can only annihilate an even number of Kramers pairs if TR is preserved. As a result, at least one pair of gapless edge states can survive.

This fermion doubling theorem can be generalized to 3D in a straightforward way. In the 2D QSH state, the simplest helical edge state consists of a single massless Dirac fermion in (1 + 1)D. The simplest 3D topological insulator contains a surface state consisting of a single massless Dirac fermion in (2 + 1)D. A single massless Dirac fermion would also violate the fermion doubling theorem and cannot exist in a purely 2D system with TR symmetry. However, it can exist holographically, as the boundary of a 3D topological insulator. More generically, there is a one-to-one correspondence between topological insulators and robust gapless theories in one lower dimension (Freedman et al., 2010; Kitaev, 2009; Teo and Kane, 2010) 4. Transport theory of the helical edge states

In conventional diffusive electronics, bulk transport satisfies Ohm's law. Resistance is proportional to the length and inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area, implying the existence of a local resistivity or conductivity tensor. However, in systems such as the QH and QSH states, the existence of edge states necessarily leads to nonlocal transport which invalidates the concept of local resistivity. Such nonlocal transport has been experimentally observed in the QH regime in the presence of a large magnetic field (Beenakker and van Houten, 1991) , and the nonlocal transport is well described by a quantum transport theory based on the Landauer-Büttiker formalism (Büttiker, 1988) . A similar transport theory has been developed for the helical edge states of the QSH states, and the nonlocal transport experiments are in excellent agreement with the theory (Roth et al., 2009) . These measurements are now widely acknowledged as constituting definitive experimental evidence for the existence of edge states in the QSH regime (Büttiker, 2009) .

Within the general Landauer-Büttiker formalism (Büttiker, 1986) , the current-voltage relationship is expressed as

where I i is the current flowing out of the ith electrode into the sample region, V i is the voltage on the ith electrode, and T ji is the transmission probability from the ith to the jth electrode. The total current is conserved in the sense that i I i = 0.

A voltage lead j is defined by the condition that it draws no net current, i.e. I j = 0. The physical currents remain unchanged if the voltages on all electrodes are shifted by a constant amount µ, implying that i T ij = i T ji . In a TR invariant system, the transmission coefficients satisfy the condition T ij = T ji .

For a general 2D sample, the number of transmission channels scales with the width of the sample, so that the transmis-sion matrix T ij is complicated and nonuniversal. However, a tremendous simplification arises if the quantum transport is entirely dominated by the edge states. In the QH regime, chiral edge states are responsible for the transport. For a standard Hall bar with N current and voltage leads attached, the transmission matrix elements for the ν = 1 QH state are given by T (QH) i+1,i = 1, for i = 1, . . . , N , and all other matrix elements vanish identically. Here we periodically identify the i = N + 1 electrode with i = 1. Chiral edge states are protected from backscattering, therefore, the ith electrode transmits perfectly to the neighboring (i + 1)th electrode on one side only. In the example of current leads on the electrodes 1 and 4, and voltage leads on the electrodes 2, 3, 5 and 6, (see the inset of Fig. 12 for the labeling), one finds that

e 2 I 14 , giving a four-terminal resistance of R 14,23 = 0 and a two-terminal resistance of R 14,14 = h e 2 . The helical edge states can be viewed as two copies of chiral edge states related by TR symmetry. Therefore, the transmission matrix is given by T (QSH) = T (QH) + T † (QH), implying that the only nonvanishing matrix elements are given by

Considering again the example of current leads on the electrodes 1 and 4, and voltage leads on the electrodes 2, 3, 5 and 6, one finds that

e 2 I 14 , giving a four-terminal resistance of R 14,23 = h 2e 2 and a two-terminal resistance of R 14,14 = 3h 2e 2 . Four terminal resistance with different configurations of voltage and current probes can be predicted in the same way, which are all rational fractions of h/e 2 . The experimental data [Fig. 16 ] neatly confirms all these highly nontrivial theoretical predictions (Roth et al., 2009) . For two micro Hall bar structures that differ only in the dimensions of the area between the voltage contacts 3 and 4, the expected resistance values R 14,23 = h 2e 2 and R 14,14 = 3h 2e 2 are indeed observed for gate voltages for which the samples are in the QSH regime.

As mentioned earlier, one might sense a paradox between the dissipationless nature of the QSH edge states and the finite four-terminal longitudinal resistance R 14,23 , which vanishes in the QH state. We can generally assume that the microscopic Hamiltonian governing the voltage leads is invariant under TR symmetry. Therefore, one would naturally ask how such leads could cause the dissipation of the helical edge states, which are protected form backscattering by TR symmetry? In nature, TR symmetry can be broken in two ways, either at the level of the microscopic Hamiltonian, or at the level of the macroscopic irreversibility in systems whose microscopic Hamiltonian respects TR symmetry. When the helical edge states propagate without dissipation inside the QSH insulator between the electrodes, neither forms of TR symmetry breaking are present. As a result, the two counter-propagating channels can be maintained at two different quasi-chemical potentials, leading to a net current flow. However, once they enter the voltage leads, they interact with a reservoir containing a large number of low-energy degrees of freedom, and TR symmetry is effectively broken by the macroscopic irreversibility. As a result, the two counter-propagating channels equilibrate at the same chemical potential, determined by the voltage of the lead. Dissipation occurs with the equilibration process. The transport equation ( 23 ) breaks the macroscopic TR symmetry, even though the microscopic TR symmetry is ensured by the relationship T ij = T ji . In contrast to the case of the QH state, the absence of dissipation in the QSH helical edge states is protected by Kramers' theorem, which relies on the quantum phase coherence of wave functions. Thus, dissipation can occur once phase coherence is destroyed in the metallic leads. On the contrary, the robustness of QH chiral edge states does not require phase coherence. A more rigorous and microscopic analysis of the different role played by a metallic lead in QH and QSH states has been performed (Roth et al., 2009) , the result of which agrees with the simple transport equations ( 23 ) and ( 24 ). These two equations correctly describe the dissipationless quantum transport inside the QSH insulator, and the dissipation inside the electrodes. As shown in Sec. II.F.4, these equations can be put to more stringent experimental tests.

The unique helical edge states of the QSH state can be used to construct devices with interesting transport properties (Akhmerov et al., 2009; Kharitonov, 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) . Besides the edge state transport, the QSH state also leads to interesting bulk transport properties (Novik et al., 2010) .

In the previous sections, we discussed the transport properties of the helical edge states in the QSH state. Unlike the case of the QH state, these transport properties are not expected to be precisely quantized, since they are not directly related to the Z 2 topological invariant which characterizes the topological state. In this section, we show that it is possible to measure the Z 2 topological quantum number directly in experiments. We shall discuss two examples. The first is the fractional charge and quantized current experiments at the edge of a QSH system (Qi et al., 2008) . Second, we discuss the spin-charge separation effect occurring in the bulk of the sample (Qi and Zhang, 2008; Ran et al., 2008) .

The first theoretical proposal we discuss is that of a localized fractional charge at the edge of a QSH sample when a magnetic domain wall is present. The concept of fractional charge in a condensed matter system induced at a mass domain wall goes back to the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model (Su et al., 1979) . For spinless fermions, a mass domain wall induces a localized state with one-half of the elec-tron charge. However, for a real material such as polyacetylene, two spin orientations are present for each electron, and because of this doubling, a domain wall in polyacetylene only carries integer charge. The beautiful proposal of SSH, and its counterpart in field theory, the Jackiw-Rebbi model (Jackiw and Rebbi, 1976) , have never been experimentally realized. As mentioned earlier, conventional 1D electronic systems have four basic degrees of freedom, i.e. forward-and backward-movers with two spins. However, a helical liquid at a given edge of the QSH insulator has only two: a spin up (down) forward-mover and a spin down (up) backward-mover. Therefore, the helical liquid has half the degrees of freedom of a conventional 1D system, and thus avoids the doubling problem. Because of this fundamental topological property of the helical liquid, a domain wall carries charge e/2. In addition, if the magnetization is rotated periodically, a quantized charge current will flow. This provides a direct realization of the Thouless topological pump (Thouless, 1983) .

We begin with the edge Hamiltonian given in Eq. ( 17 ). These helical fermion states only have two degrees of freedom; the spin polarization is correlated with the direction of motion. A mass term, being proportional to the Pauli matrices σ 1,2,3 , can only be introduced in the Hamiltonian by coupling to a TR symmetry breaking external field such as a magnetic field, aligned magnetic impurities (Gao et al., 2009) , or interaction-driven ferromagnetic order on the edge (Kharitonov, 2010) . To leading order in perturbation theory, a magnetic field generates the mass terms

where Ψ = (ψ + , ψ -) T and the model-dependent coefficient matrix t ai is determined by the coupling of the edge states to the magnetic field. According to the work of Goldstone and Wilczek (Goldstone and Wilczek, 1981) , at zero temperature the ground-state charge density j 0 ≡ ρ and current j 1 ≡ j in a background field m a (x, t) is given by

with µ, ν = 0, 1 corresponding to the time and space components, respectively, and m 3 does not enter the longwavelength charge-response equation. If we parameterize the mass terms in terms of an angular variable θ, i.e. m 1 = m cos θ, m 2 = m sin θ, the response equation is simplified to

Such a response is topological in the sense that the net charge Q in a region [x 1 , x 2 ] at time t depends only on the boundary values of θ(x, t) i.e. Q = [θ(x 2 , t)θ(x 1 , t)] /2π. In particular, a half-charge ±e/2 is carried by an anti-phase domain wall of θ [Fig. 7(a) ] (Jackiw and Rebbi, 1976) . Similarly, the charge pumped by a purely time-dependent

From the linear relation m a = t ai B i , the angle θ can be determined for a given magnetic field B. Independent from the details of t ai , opposite magnetic fields B and -B always correspond to opposite mass, so that θ(B) = θ(-B) + π. Thus the charge localized on an anti-phase magnetic domain wall of magnetization field is always e/2 mod e, which is a direct manifestation of the Z 2 topological quantum number of the QSH state. Such a half charge is detectable in a specially designed single-electron transistor device (Qi et al., 2008) .

In addition to the fractional charge on the edge, there have been theoretical proposals for a bulk spin-charge separation effect (Qi and Zhang, 2008; Ran et al., 2008) . These ideas are similar to the Z 2 spin pump proposed in (Fu and Kane, 2006) . We first present an argument which is physically intuitive, but only valid when there is at least a U (1) s spin rotation symmetry, e.g. when S z is conserved. In this case, the QSH effect is simply defined as two copies of the QH effect, with opposite Hall conductances of ±e 2 /h for opposite spin orientations. Without loss of generality, we first consider a disk geometry with an electromagnetic gauge flux of φ ↑ = φ ↓ = hc/2e, or simply π in units of = c = e = 1, through a hole at the center [Fig. 8 ]. The gauge flux acts on both spin orientations, and the π flux preserves TR symmetry. We consider adiabatic processes φ ↑ (t) and φ ↓ (t), where φ ↑ (t) = φ ↓ (t) = 0 at t = 0, and φ ↑ (t) = φ ↓ (t) = ±π at t = 1. Since the flux of π is equivalent to the flux of -π, there are four different adiabatic processes all reaching the same final flux configuration. In process (a), φ

and φ ↑ (t = 1) = -π. These four processes are illustrated in Fig. 8 . Processes (a) and (b) preserve TR symmetry at all intermediate stages, while processes (c) and (d) only preserve TR symmetry at the final stage.

We consider a Gaussian loop surrounding the flux. As the flux φ ↑ (t) is turned on adiabatically, Faraday's law of induction states that a tangential electric field E ↑ is induced along the Gaussian loop. The quantized Hall conductance implies a radial current j ↑ = e 2 h ẑ × E ↑ , resulting in a net charge flow ∆Q ↑ through the Gaussian loop:

An identical argument applied to the spin down component shows that ∆Q ↓ = -e/2. Therefore, this adiabatic process creates the holon state with ∆Q = ∆Q ↑ + ∆Q ↓ = -e and ∆S z = ∆Q ↑ -∆Q ↓ = 0. Applying similar arguments to process (b) gives ∆Q ↑ = ∆Q ↓ = e/2, which leads to a chargeon state with ∆Q = e and ∆S z = 0. Processes (c) and (d) give ∆Q ↑ = -∆Q ↓ = e/2 and ∆Q ↑ = -∆Q ↓ = -e/2 respectively, which yield the spinon states with ∆Q = 0 and ∆S z = ±1/2. The Hamiltonians H(t) in the presence of the gauge flux are the same at t = 0 and t = 1, but differ in the intermediate stages of the four adiabatic processes. Assuming that the ground state is unique at t = 0, we obtain four final states at t = 1, which are the holon, chargeon and the two spinon states. Both the spin and the charge quantum numbers are sharply defined quantum numbers (Kivelson and Schrieffer, 1982) . The insulating state has a bulk gap ∆, and an associated coherence length ξ ∼ A/∆ where A is the Dirac parameter in Eq. 1. As long as the radius of the Gaussian loop r G far exceeds the coherence length, i.e., r G ≫ ξ, the spin and the charge quantum numbers are sharply defined with exponential accuracy.

When the spin rotation symmetry is broken but TR symmetry is still present, the concept of spin-charge separation is still well defined (Qi and Zhang, 2008) . A spinon state can be defined as a Kramers doublet without any charge, and a holon or a chargeon is a Kramers singlet carrying charge ±e. By combining the spin and charge flux threading (Essin and Moore, 2007) , it can be shown generally that these spin-charge separated quantum numbers are localized near a φ = π flux (Qi and Zhang, 2008; Ran et al., 2008) .

Although TR invariance is essential in the QSH insulator, there is a TR symmetry breaking state of matter which is closely related to the QSH insulator: the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) insulator. The QAH insulator is a band insulator with quantized Hall conductance but without orbital magnetic field. Nearly two decades ago, Haldane (Haldane, 1988) proposed a model on a honeycomb lattice where the QH is realized without any external magnetic field, or the breaking of translational symmetry. However, the microscopic mechanism of circulating current loops within one unit cell has not been realized in any materials. Qi, Wu and Zhang (Qi et al., 2006) proposed a simple model based on the concept of the QAH insulator with ferromagnetic moments interacting with band electrons via the SOC. This simple model can be realized in real materials. Two recent proposals (Liu et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2010 ) make use of the properties of TR invariant topological insulators to realize the QAH state by magnetic doping. This is not accidental, but shows the deep relationship between these two states of matter. Thus we give a brief review of the QAH state in this subsection.

As a starting point, consider the upper 2 × 2 block of the QSH Hamiltonian (2):

If we consider only these two bands, this model describes a TR symmetry breaking system (Qi et al., 2006) . As long as there is a gap between the two bands, the Hall conductance of the system is quantized (Thouless et al., 1982) . The quantized Hall conductance is determined by the first Chern number of the Berry phase gauge field in the Brillouin zone, which, for the generic two-band model ( 28 ), reduces to the following formula:

which is e 2 /h times the winding number of the unit vector

tor defined in Eq. ( 3 ) has a skyrmion structure for M/B &gt; 0 with winding number 1, while the winding number is 0 for M/B &lt; 0. Just as in an ordinary QH insulator, the system with nontrivial Hall conductance e 2 /h has one chiral edge state propagating on the edge. For the QSH system described by Eq. ( 2 ), the lower 2×2 block has the opposite Hall conductance, so that the total Hall conductance is zero, as guaranteed by TR symmetry. The chiral edge state of the QAH and its TR partner form the helical edge states of the QSH insulator. When TR symmetry is broken, the two spin blocks are no longer related, and their charge Hall conductances no longer cancel exactly. For example, we can consider a different mass M for the two blocks, which breaks TR symmetry. If one block is in the trivial insulator phase (M/B &lt; 0) and the other block is in the QAH phase (M/B &gt; 0), the whole system becomes a QAH state with Hall conductance ±e 2 /h. Physically, this can be realized by exchange coupling with magnetic impurities. In a system doped with magnetic impurities, the spin splitting term induced by the magnetization is generically written as

where G E and G H describe the splitting of E1 and H1 bands respectively, which are generically different. Adding H s to the Hamiltonian (2), we see that the mass term M for the upper block is replaced by M +(G E -G H )/2, while that for the lower block is replaced by M -(G E -G H )/2. Therefore, the two blocks do acquire a different mass, which makes it possible to reach the QAH phase. After considering the effect of the identity term (G E + G H )/2, the condition for the QAH phase is given by

the two blocks still acquire a different mass, but the system becomes metallic before the two blocks develop an opposite Hall conductance. Physically, we can also understand the physics from the edge state picture [Fig. 9(b) ]. On the boundary of a QSH insulator there are counter-propagating edge states carrying opposite spin. When the spin splitting term increases, one of the two blocks, say the spin down block, experiences a topological phase transition at M = (G E -G H )/2. The spin down edge states penetrate deeper into the bulk due to the decreasing gap and eventually disappear, leaving only the spin up state bound more strongly to the edge. Thus, the system has only spin up edge states and evolves from the QSH state to the QAH state [Fig. 9(b) ]. Although the discussion above is based on the specific model ( 2 ), the mechanism to generate a QAH insulator from a QSH insulator is generic. A QSH insulator can always evolve into a QAH insulator once a TR symmetry breaking perturbation is introduced. Fortunately, in Mn-doped HgTe QWs the condition G E G H &lt; 0 is indeed satisfied, so that the QAH phase exists in this system as long as the Mn spins are polarized. The microscopic reason for the opposite sign of G E and G H is the opposite sign of the s-d and p-d exchange couplings in this system (Liu et al., 2008) . Interestingly, in another family of QSH insulators, Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 thin films (Liu et al., 2010) , the condition G E G H &lt; 0 is also satisfied when magnetic impurities such as Cr or Fe are introduced into the system, but for a different physical reason. In HgTe QWs, the two bands in the upper block of the Hamiltonian (2) have the same direction of spin, but couple with the impurity spin with an opposite sign of exchange coupling because one band originates from s-orbitals while the other originates from porbitals. In Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 , both bands originate from p-orbitals, which have the same sign of exchange coupling with the impurity spin, but the sign of spin in the upper block is opposite (Yu et al., 2010) . Consequently, the condition G E G H &lt; 0 is still satisfied. More details on the properties of the Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 family of materials can be found in the next section, since as bulk materials they are both 3D topological insulators.

As shown above, the transition from a normal to an inverted band structure coincides with the phase transition from a trivial insulator to the QSH insulator. In order to cover both the normal and the inverted band structure regime, HgTe QW samples with a QW width in the range from 4.5 nm to 12.0 nm were grown (König, 2007; König et al., 2008; König et al., 2007) by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Samples with mobilities of several 10 5 cm 2 /(V•s), even for low densities n &lt; 5 × 10 11 cm -2 , were available for transport measurements. In such samples, the mean free path is of the order of several microns. For the investigation of the QSH effect, devices in a Hall bar geometry [Fig. 12 , inset] of various dimensions were fabricated from QW structures with well widths of 4.5 nm, 5.5 nm, 6.4 nm, 6.5 nm, 7.2 nm, 7.3 nm, 8.0 nm and 12.0 nm.

For the investigation of the QSH effect, samples with a low intrinsic density n(V g = 0) &lt; 5 × 10 11 cm -2 were studied. When a negative gate voltage V g is applied to the top gate electrode of the device, the usual decrease in electron density is observed. In Fig. 10(a) , measurements of the Hall resistance R xy are presented for a Hall bar with length L = 600 µm and width W = 200 µm. The decrease of the carrier density is reflected in an increase of the Hall coefficient when the gate voltage is lowered from 0 V to -1 V. In this voltage range, the density decreases linearly from 3.5 × 10 11 cm -2 to 0.5 × 10 11 cm -2 [Fig. 10(b) ]. For even lower gate voltages, the

V th sample becomes insulating, because the Fermi energy E F is shifted into the bulk gap. When a large negative voltage V g ≤ -2 V is applied, the sample becomes conducting again. It can be inferred from the change in sign of the Hall coefficient that the device is p-conducting. Thus, E F has been shifted into the valence band, passing through the entire bulk gap.

The peculiar band structure of HgTe QWs gives rise to a unique LL dispersion. For a normal band structure, i.e., d QW &lt; d c , all LLs are shifted to higher energies for increasing magnetic fields [Fig. 11(a) ]. This is the usual behavior and can be commonly observed in most materials. When the band structure of the HgTe QW is inverted for d QW &gt; d c , From König et al., 2008. however, a significant change is observed for the LL dispersion [Fig. 11 (b) ]. Due to the inversion of electron-like and hole-like bands, states near the bottom of the conduction band have predominantly p character. Consequently, the energy of the lowest LL decreases with increasing magnetic field.

On the other hand, states near the top of the valence band have predominantly s character, and the highest LL shifts to higher energies with increasing magnetic field. This leads to a crossing of these two peculiar LLs for a special value of the magnetic field. This behavior has been observed earlier by the Würzburg group and can now be demonstrated analytically within the BHZ model (König et al., 2008) . The exact magnetic field B cross at which the crossing occurs depends on d QW . The existence of the LL crossing is a clear signature of an inverted band structure, which corresponds to a negative energy gap with M/B &lt; 0 in the BHZ model. The crossing of the LLs from the conduction and valence bands can be observed in experiments [Fig. 12(a) ]. For gate voltages V g ≥ -1.0 V and V g ≤ -2.0 V, E F is clearly in the conduction band and valence band, respectively. When E F is shifted towards the bottom of the conduction band, i.e. V g &lt; -1.0 V, a transition from a QH state with filling factor ν = 1, i.e. R xy = h/e 2 = 25.8 kΩ, to an insulating state is observed. Such behavior is expected independently of the details of the band structure, when the lowest LL of the conduction band crosses E F for a finite magnetic field. When E F is located within the gap, a nontrivial behavior can be observed for devices with an inverted band structure. Since the lowest LL of the conduction band lowers its energy with increasing magnetic field, it will cross E F for a certain magnetic field. Subsequently, one occupied LL is below E F , giving rise to the usual transport signatures of the quantum Hall regime, i.e. R xy is quantized at h/e 2 and R xx vanishes. When the magnetic field is increased, the LLs from the valence and conduction band cross. Upon crossing, their "character" is exchanged, i.e. the level from the valence band turns into a conduction band LL and vice versa. The lowest LL of the conduction band now rises in energy for larger magnetic fields. Consequently, it will cross the E F for a certain magnetic field. Since E F will be located within the fundamental gap again afterwards, the sample will become insulating again. Such a reentrant n-type QH state is shown in Fig. 12 (a) for V g = -1.4 V (green trace).

For lower gate voltages, a corresponding behavior is observed for a p-type QH state (e.g. red trace for V g = -1.8 V). As Fig. 12 (b) shows, the experimental results are in good agreement with the theoretically calculated LL dispersion. The crossing point of the LLs in magnetic field, B cross , can be determined accurately by tuning E F through the energy gap. Thus, the width of the QW layer can be verified experimentally (König et al., 2007) .

The observation of a reentrant QH state is a clear indication of the nontrivial insulating behavior, which is a prerequisite for the existence of the QSH state. In contrast, trivial insulating behavior is obtained for devices with d QW &lt; d c . For a normal band structure, the energy gap between the lowest LLs of the conduction and valence bands increases in magnetic field [Fig. 11(a) ]. Thus, a sample remains insulating in magnetic field, if E F is located in the gap at zero field. The details of the physics of this reentrant QH state can be understood within the BHZ model with an added orbital magnetic field (König et al., 2008) . This nontrivial LL crossing could also be detected optically (Schmidt et al., 2009) . From König et al., 2008. and an inverted band structure, however, the resistance does not exceed 100 kΩ. This behavior is reproduced for various Hall bars with a QW width in the range from 4.5 nm to 12.0 nm. While devices with a normal band structure, i.e. d QW &lt; d c ≈ 6.3 nm, show trivial insulating behavior, a finite conductance in the insulating regime is observed for samples with an inverted band structure.

The obtained finite resistance R ≈ 100 kΩ is significantly higher than the four-terminal resistance h/(2e 2 ) ≈ 12.9 kΩ one anticipates for the geometry used in the experiments. The enhanced resistance in these samples with a length of L = 20 µm can be understood as a consequence of inelastic scattering. While, as discussed above, the helical edge states are robust against single-particle elastic backscattering, inelastic mechanisms can cause backscattering. For ndoped HgTe quantum wells, the typical mobility of the order of 10 5 cm 2 /(V•s) implies an elastic mean free path of the order of 1 µm (Daumer et al., 2003) . Lower mobilities can be anticipated for the QSH regime. The inelastic mean free path, which determines the length scale of undisturbed transport by the QSH edge states, can be estimated to be several times larger due to the suppression of phonons and the reduced electron-electron scattering at low temperatures. Thus, the inelastic scattering length is of the order of a few microns.

For the observation of the QSH conductance, the sample dimensions were reduced below the estimated inelastic mean free path. When Hall bars with a length L = 1 µm are studied, a four-terminal resistance close to h/(2e 2 ) is observed. The threshold voltage V th is defined such that the QSH regime is in the vicinity of V g = V th . The slight deviation of R FIG. 14 Longitudinal resistance as a function of gate voltage for two devices with L = 1 µm. The width W is 1 µm [solid (black) and dotted (blue)] and 0.5 µm [dashed (red)]. The solid and dashed traces were obtained at a temperature of 1.8 K, and the dotted one at 4.2 K. From König et al., 2008. from the quantized value h/(2e 2 ) can be attributed to some residual scattering. This is an indication that the length of the edge states still exceeds the inelastic mean free path. The results presented in Fig. 14 provide evidence that transport in the QSH regime indeed occurs due to edge states. The two devices with W = 1.0 µm and W = 0.5 µm were fabricated from the same QW structure. The resistance of the two devices differ significantly in the n-conducting regime, where transport is determined by bulk properties. In the QSH regime, however, both devices exhibit the same resistance, even though the width of the devices differs by a factor of two. This fact clearly shows that the conductance is due to the edge states, which are independent of the sample width.

Another indication that the observed nontrivial insulating state is caused by the QSH effect is obtained by measurements in a magnetic field. The following experimental results were obtained on a Hall bar with dimensions (L × W ) = (20.0 × 13.3) µm 2 in a vector magnet system at a temperature of 1.4 K (König, 2007; König et al., 2007) . When a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the QW layer, the QSH conductance decreases significantly already for small fields. A cusp-like magnetoconductance peak is observed with a full width at half-maximum B FWHM of 28 mT. Additional measurements show that the width of the magnetoconductance peak decreases with decreasing temperature. For example, B FWHM = 10 mT is observed at 30 mK. For various devices of different sizes, a qualitatively similar behavior in magnetic field is observed. When the magnetic field is tilted towards the plane of the QW, the magnetoconductance peak around B = 0 widens steadily [Fig. 15 ]. For a tilt angle α = 90 • , i.e. when the magnetic field is in the QW plane, only a very small decrease in the conductance is observed. The decrease of the conductance for an in-plane field can be described by B FWHM ≈ 0.7 T for any in-plane orientation. From the results shown in Fig. 15 , it is evident that a perpendicular field has a much larger influence on the QSH state than an in-plane field. The magnetoresistance in the QSH regime has been investigated theoretically (Chu et al., 2009; König et al., 2008; Maciejko et al., 2009; Tkachov and Hankiewicz, 2010) . The large anisotropy can be understood by a slightly modified version of the BHZ model with the inclusion of BIA terms and anisotropy in the g-factor (König et al., 2008; Maciejko et al., 2009) . The cusp behavior in the magnetoconductance is possibly due to the presence of strong disorder; numerical simu- lations (Maciejko et al., 2009) are in good agreement with the experimental results.

Further confidence in the helical edge state transport can be gained by performing more extended multi-terminal experiments (Roth et al., 2009) . The longitudinal resistance of a device was measured by passing a current through contacts 1 and 4 [Fig. 16 ] and by detecting the voltage between contacts 2 and 3 (R 14,23 ). For this case, a result similar to the results found previously, i.e. a resistance h/(2e 2 ) when the bulk of the device is gated into the insulating regime [Fig. 16(a) ]. However, the longitudinal resistance is significantly different in a slightly modified configuration, where the current is passed through contacts 1 and 3 and the voltage is measured between contacts 4 and 5 (R 13,45 ) [Fig. 16(b) ]. The result is R 13,45 ≈ 8.6 kΩ, which is markedly different from what one would expect for either QH transport, or purely diffusive transport, where this configuration would be equivalent to the previous one. However, the application of the transport equations ( 23 ) and ( 24 ) indeed predicts that the observed behavior is what one expects for helical edge channels. One easily finds that this resistance value can be expressed as an integer fraction of the inverse conductance quanta e 2 /h: R 13,45 = h/3e 2 . This result shows that the current through the device is influenced by the number of ohmic contacts in the current path. As discussed earlier, these ohmic contacts lead to the equilibration inside the contact of the chemical potentials of the two counter-propagating helical edge channels.

Another measurement that directly confirms the nonlocal character of the helical edge channel transport in the QSH regime is shown in Fig. 17 . This figure shows data obtained from a device in the shape of the letter "H". In this fourterminal device the current is passed through contacts 1 and 4 and the voltage is measured between contacts 2 and 3. In the metallic n-type regime (low gate voltage) the voltage sig- nal tends to zero. In the QSH regime, however, the nonlocal resistance signal increases to ≈ 6.5 kΩ, which again fits perfectly to the result of Laudauer-Büttiker considerations: R 14,23 = h/4e 2 ≈ 6.45 kΩ. Classically, one would expect only a minimal signal in this configuration (from Poisson's equation, assuming diffusive transport, one estimates a signal of about 40 Ω), and certainly not one that increases so strongly when the bulk of the sample is depleted. The signal measured here is fully nonlocal, and can be taken (as was done twenty years ago for the QH regime) as definite evidence of the existence of edge channel transport in the QSH regime.

The model Hamiltonian for the 2D topological insulator in HgTe QWs also gives a basic template for generalization to 3D, leading to a simple model Hamiltonian for a class of materials: Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , and Sb 2 Te 3 (Zhang et al., 2009) . Similar to their 2D counterpart the HgTe QWs, these materials can be described by a simple but realistic model, where SOC drives a band inversion transition at the Γ point. In the topologically nontrivial phase, the bulk states are fully gapped, but there is a topologically protected surface state consisting of a single massless Dirac fermion. The 2D massless Dirac fermion is "helical", in the sense that the electron spin points perpendicularly to the momentum, forming a left-handed helical texture in momentum space. Similarly to the 1D helical edge states, a single massless Dirac fermion state is "holographic", in the sense that it cannot occur in a purely 2D system with TR symmetry, but can exist as the boundary of a 3D insulator. TR invariant single-particle perturbations cannot introduce a gap for the surface state. A gap can open for the surface state when a TR breaking perturbation is introduced on the surface. Moreover, the system becomes full insulating, both in the bulk and on the surface. In this case, the topological properties of the fully gapped insulator are characterized by a novel topological magnetoelectric effect.

Soon after the theoretical prediction of the 3D topological insulator in the Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 (Zhang et al., 2009) and Bi 2 Se 3 (Xia et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009) class of materials, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) observed the surface states with a single Dirac cone (Chen et al., 2009; Hsieh et al., 2009; Xia et al., 2009) . Furthermore, spin-resolved ARPES measurements indeed observed the left-handed helical spin texture of the massless Dirac fermion (Hsieh et al., 2009) . These pioneering theoretical and experimental works inspired much of the subsequent developments which we review in this section.

We take advantage of the model simplicity of the Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 class of 3D topological insulators and give a pedagogical introduction based on this particular material system. In the next section, we shall introduce the general theory of the topological insulators. The electronic structure of the Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 class of topological insulators is simple enough to be captured by a simple model Hamiltonian. However, more powerful methods are needed to determine the topological properties of materials with a more complex electronic structure. In this regard, the TBT has played an important role (Fu et al., 2007; Moore and Balents, 2007; Roy, 2009) . In particular, a method due to Fu and Kane (Fu and Kane, 2007) gives a simple algorithm to determine the topological properties of an arbitrarily complex electronic structure with inversion symmetry. This method predicts that Bi x Sb 1-x is a topological insulator for a certain range of composition x. ARPES measurements (Hsieh et al., 2008) have indeed observed topologically nontrivial surface states in this system, giving the first example of a 3D topological insulator. The topological properties of this material have been further investigated both theoretically and experimentally (Nishide et al., 2010; Teo et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009) . however, the surface states in Bi x Sb 1-x are rather complicated, and cannot be described by simple model Hamiltonians. For this reason, we focus on the Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 class of topological insulators in this section.

In this review we focus on an effective model for 3D topological insulators (Zhang et al., 2009) which, simply by adjusting parameters, is valid for studying the properties of Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , and Sb 2 Te 3 . Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , and Sb 2 Te 3 share the same rhombohedral crystal structure with space group D 5 3d (R 3m) and five atoms per unit cell. For example, the crystal structure of Bi 2 Se 3 is shown in Fig. 18(a) , and consists of a layered structure where individual layers form a triangular lattice. The important symmetry axes are a trigonal axis (three-fold rotation symmetry) defined as the z axis, a binary axis (two-fold rotation symmetry) defined as the x axis, The coupling between two atomic layers within a quintuple layer is strong, while that between quintuple layers is much weaker, and predominantly of the van der Waals type. The primitive lattice vectors t 1,2,3 and rhombohedral primitive unit cells are shown in Fig. 18(a) . The Se2 site plays the role of an inversion center. Under inversion, Bi1 is mapped to Bi1 ′ and Se1 is mapped to Se1 ′ .

To get a better understanding of the band structure and orbitals involved, we start from the atomic energy levels and then consider the effects of crystal field splitting and SOC on the energy eigenvalues at the Γ point in momentum space. This is summarized schematically in three stages (I), (II) and (III) [Fig. 19(a) ]. Since the states near the Fermi level are primarily from p-orbitals, we will neglect the s-orbitals and start from the atomic p-orbitals of Bi (electronic configuration 6s 2 6p 3 ) and Se (4s 2 4p 4 ). In stage (I), we consider chemical bonding between Bi and Se atoms within a quintuple layer, which corresponds to the largest energy scale in this problem. First, we can recombine the orbitals in a single unit cell according to their parity. This results in three states (two odd, one even) from each Se p-orbital and two states (one odd, one even) from each Bi p-orbital. The formation of chemical bonds hybridizes the states on the Bi and Se atoms, and pushes down all the Se states and lifts all the Bi states. In Fig. 19 (a), these five hybridized states are labeled as P 1 ±

x,y,z , P 2 ±

x,y,z and P 0 - x,y,z , where the superscripts ± stand for the parity of the corresponding states. In stage (II), we consider the effect of crystal field splitting between different p-orbitals. According to the point group symmetry, the p z orbital is split from the p x and p y orbitals while the latter two remain degenerate. After this splitting, the energy levels closest to the Fermi energy turn out to be the p z levels |P 1 + z and |P 2 - z . In the last stage (III), we take into account the effect of SOC. The atomic SOC Hamiltonian is given by H SO = λL • S, with L, S the orbital and spin angular momentum, respectively, and λ the strength of SOC. The SOC Hamiltonian mixes spin and orbital angular momenta while preserving the total angular momentum. This leads to a level repulsion between |P 1 + z , ↑ and P 1 + x+iy , ↓ , and between similar combinations. Consequently, the energy of the |P 1 + z , ↑ (↓) state is pushed down by the effect of SOC, and the energy of the |P 2 - z , ↑ (↓) state is pushed up. If SOC is larger than a critical value λ &gt; λ c , the order of these two energy levels is reversed. To illustrate this inversion process explicitly, the energy levels |P 1 + z and |P 2 - z have been calculated (Zhang et al., 2009) for a model Hamiltonian of Bi 2 Se 3 with artificially rescaled atomic SOC parameters λ(Bi) = xλ 0 (Bi), λ(Se) = xλ 0 (Se), as shown in Fig. 19(b ). Here λ 0 (Bi) = 1.25 eV and λ 0 (Se) = 0.22 eV are the actual values of the SOC strength for Bi and Se atoms, respectively (Wittel and Manne, 1974) . From Fig. 19 (b), one can clearly see that a level crossing occurs between |P 1 + z and |P 2 - z when the SOC strength is about 60% of its actual value. Since these two levels have opposite parity, the inversion between them drives the system into a topological insulator phase, similar to the case of HgTe QWs (Bernevig et al., 2006) . Therefore, the mechanism for the occurrence of a 3D topological insulating phase in this system is closely analogous to the mechanism for the 2D QSH effect (2D topological insulator) in HgTe (Bernevig et al., 2006) . More precisely, to determine whether or not an inversion-symmetric crystal is a topological insulator, we must have full knowledge of the states at all of the eight TR invariant momenta (TRIM) (Fu and Kane, 2007) . The system is a (strong) topological insulator if and only if the band inversion between states with opposite parity occurs at odd number of TRIM. The parity of the Bloch states at all TRIM have been studied by ab initio methods for the four materials Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Se 3 , and Sb 2 Te 3 (Zhang et al., 2009) . Comparing the Bloch states with and without SOC, one conclude that Sb 2 Se 3 is a trivial insulator, while the other three are topological insulators. For the three topological insulators, the band inversion only occurs at the Γ point.

Since the topological nature is determined by the physics near the Γ point, it is possible to write down a simple effective Hamiltonian to characterize the low-energy, long-wavelength properties of the system. Starting from the four low-lying states |P 1 + z , ↑ (↓) and |P 2 - z , ↑ (↓) at the Γ point, such a Hamiltonian can be constructed by the theory of invari- (see text). A level crossing occurs between these two states at x = xc ≃ 0.6. Adapted from Zhang et al., 2009. ants (Winkler, 2003) at a finite wavevector k. The important symmetries of the system are TR symmetry T , inversion symmetry I, and three-fold rotation symmetry C 3 aroung the z axis. In the basis

, where I n×n is the n × n identity matrix, K is the complex conjugation operator, and σ x,y,z and τ x,y,z denote the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital space, respectively. By requiring these three symmetries and keeping only terms up to quadratic order in k, we obtain the following generic form of the effective Hamiltonian:

The parameters in the effective model can be determined by fitting the energy spectrum of the effective Hamiltonian to that of ab initio calculations (Liu et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009 Zhang et al., , 2010)) . The fitting leads to the parameters displayed in Table II (Liu et al., 2010) .

Except for the identity term ǫ 0 (k), the Hamiltonian (31) is similar to the 3D Dirac model with uniaxial anisotropy along the z direction, but with the crucial difference that the mass term is k-dependent. From the fact that M, B 1 , B 2 &gt; 0 we can see that the order of the bands |T 1 + z , ↑ (↓) and |T 2 - z , ↑ (↓) is inverted around k = 0 compared with large k, which correctly characterizes the topologically nontrivial Corrections to the effective Hamiltonian (31) that are of higher order in k can also be considered. To cubic (k 3 ) order, some new terms can break the continuous rotation symmetry around the z axis to a discrete three-fold rotation symmetry C 3 . Correspondingly, the Fermi surface of the surface state acquires a hexagonal shape (Fu, 2009) , which leads to important consequences for experiments on topological insulators such as surface state quasiparticle interference (Alpichshev et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2009) . A modified version of the effective model (31) taking into account corrections up to k 3 has been obtained for the three topological insulators Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , and Sb 2 Te 3 based on ab initio calculations (Liu et al., 2010) . In this same work (Liu et al., 2010) , an eight-band model is also proposed for a more quantitative description of this family of topological insulators.

The existence of topological surface states is one of the most important properties of topological insulators. The surface states can be directly extracted from ab initio calculations by constructing maximally localized Wannier functions and calculating the local density of states on an open boundary (Zhang et al., 2009) . The result for the Bi 2 Se 3 family of materials is shown in Fig. 20(a)-(d) , where one can clearly see the single Dirac-cone surface state for the three topologically nontrivial materials. However, to obtain a better understanding of the physical origin of topological surface states, it is helpful to show how the surface states emerge from the effective model (31) (Linder et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) . The surface states can be obtained in a similar way as the edge states of the BHZ model (Sec. II.B).

Consider the model Hamiltonian (31) on the half-space z &gt; 0. In the same way as in the 2D case, we can divide the model Hamiltonian into two parts, Ĥ = H0 + H1 , (32)

with

H0 in Eq. ( 8 ) and Eq. ( 32 ) are identical, with the parameters A, B, C, D, M in Eq. ( 8 ) replaced by A 1 , B 1 , C, D 1 , M in Eq. ( 32 ). Therefore, the surface state at k x = k y = 0 is determined by the same equation as that for the QSH edge states. A surface state solution exists for M/B 1 &gt; 0. In the same way as in the 2D case, the surface state has a helicity determined by the sign of A 1 /B 1 . (Here and below we always consider the case with

In analogy to the 2D QSH case, the surface effective model can be obtained by projecting the bulk Hamiltonian onto the surface states. To the leading order in k x , k y , the effective surface Hamiltonian H surf has the following matrix form (Liu et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) :

Higher order terms such as k 3 terms break the axial symmetry around the z axis down to a three-fold rotation symmetry, which has been studied in the literature (Fu, 2009; Liu et al., 2010) . For A 2 = 4.1 eV• Å, the velocity of the surface states is given by v = A 2 / ≃ 6.2×10 5 m/s, which agrees reasonably with ab initio results [Fig. 20 ] v ≃ 5.0 × 10 5 m/s. To understand the physical properties of the surface states, we need to analyze the form of the spin operators in this system. By using the wave function from ab initio calculations and projecting the spin operators onto the subspace spanned by the four basis states, we obtain the spin operators for our model Hamiltonian, with matrix elements between surface states given by

, with S x(y,z)0 some positive constants. Therefore, we see that the Pauli σ matrix in the model Hamiltonian (34) is proportional to the physical spin. As discussed above, the spin direction is determined by the sign of the parameter A 1 /B 1 , which depends on material properties such as the atomic SOC. In the Bi 2 Se 3 family of materials, the upper Dirac cone has a left-handed helicity when looking from above the surface [Fig. 20(e), (f)] .

From the discussion above, we see that the surface state is described by a 2D massless Dirac Hamiltonian (34). Another well-known system with a similar property is graphene, a single sheet of graphite (Castro Neto et al., 2009) . However, there is a key difference between the surface state theory for 3D topological insulators and graphene or any 2D Dirac system, which is the number of Dirac cones. Graphene has four Dirac cones at low energies, due to spin and valley degeneracy. The valley degeneracy occurs because the Dirac cones are not in the vicinity of k = 0 but rather near the two Brillouin zone corners K and K. This is generic for a purely 2D system: only an even number of Dirac cones can exist in a TR invariant system. In other words, a single 2D Dirac cone without TR symmetry breaking can only exist on the surface of a topological insulator, which is also an alternative way to understand its topological robustness. As long as TR symmetry is preserved, the surface state cannot be gapped out because no purely 2D system can provide a single Dirac cone. Such a surface state is a "holographic metal" which is 2D but determined by the 3D bulk topological property.

In this section we discussed the surface states of an insulator surrounded by vacuum. This formalism can be straightfor-wardly generalized to the interface states between two insulators (Fradkin et al., 1986; Volkov and Pankratov, 1985) . In these pioneering works, the interface states between PbTe and SnTe were investigated. The interface states consist of four Dirac cones. Therefore, they are topologically trivial and not generally stable under TR invariant perturbations. The surface states of topological insulators are also similar to the domain wall fermions of lattice gauge theory (Kaplan, 1992) . In fact, domain wall fermions are precisely introduced to avoid the fermion doubling problem on the lattice, which is similar to the concept of a single Dirac cone on the surface of a topological insulator.

The helical spin texture described by the single Dirac cone equation ( 34 ) leads to a general relation between charge current density j(x) and spin density S(x) on the surface of the topological insulator (Raghu et al., 2010) :

In particular, the plasmon mode on the surface generally carries spin (Burkov and Hawthorn, 2010; Raghu et al., 2010) .

From the discussion above, one can see that the models describing 2D and 2D topological insulators are quite similar. Both systems are described by lattice Dirac-type Hamiltonians. In particular, when inversion symmetry is present, the topologically nontrivial phase in both models is characterized by a band inversion between two states of opposite parity. Therefore, it is natural to study the relation between these two topological states of matter. One natural question is whether a thin film of 3D topological insulator, viewed as a 2D system, is a trivial insulator or a QSH insulator. Besides theoretical interest, this problem is also relevant to experiments, especially in the Bi 2 Se 3 family of materials. Indeed, these materials are layered and can be easily grown as thin films either by MBE (Li et al., 2010 (Li et al., , 2009;; Zhang et al., 2009) , catalyst-free vapor-solid growth (Kong et al., 2010) , or by mechanical exfoliation (Hong et al., 2010; Shahil et al., 2010; Teweldebrhan et al., 2010) . Several theoretical works studied thin films of the Bi 2 Se 3 family of topological insulators (Linder et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2010) . Interestingly, thin films of proper thicknesses are predicted to form a QSH insulator (Liu et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2010) , which may constitute an approach for simpler realizations of the 2D QSH effect.

Such a crossover from 3D to 2D topological insulators can be studied from two points of view, either from the bulk states of the 3D topological insulator or from the surface states. We first consider the bulk states. A thin film of 3D topological insulator is described by restricting the bulk model (31) to a QW with thickness d, outside which there is an infinite barrier describing the vacuum. To establish the connection between the 2D BHZ model ( 2 ) and the 3D topological insulator model (31), we start from the special case A 1 = 0 and consider a finite A 1 later on. For A 1 = 0 and k x = k y = 0, the Hamiltonian (31) becomes diagonal and the Schrödinger equation for the infinite QW can be easily solved.

tively. We assume M &lt; 0 and B 1 &lt; 0 so that the system stays in the inverted regime. The energy spectrum is shown in Fig. 21(a) . When the width d is small enough, electron subbands E n have a higher energy than the hole subbands H n due to quantum confinement effects. Because the bulk bands are inverted at the Γ point (M &lt; 0), the energy of the electron subbands will decrease with increasing d towards their bulk value M &lt; 0, while the energy of the hole subbands will increase towards -M &gt; 0. Therefore, there must exist a crossing point between the electron and hole subbands.

When a finite A 1 is turned on, the electron and hole bands are hybridized so that some of the crossings between the QW levels are avoided. However, as shown in Fig. 21(b) , some level crossings cannot be lifted, which is a consequence of inversion symmetry. When the band index n is increased, the parity of the wave functions alternates for both electron and hole subbands. Moreover, the atomic orbitals forming electron and hole bands are |P 1 + z , ↑ (↓) and |P 2 - z , ↑ (↓) respectively, which have opposite parity. Consequently, |E n and |H n with the same index n have opposite parity, so that their crossing cannot be avoided by the A 1 term. When a finite k x , k y is considered, each level becomes a QW subband. The bottom of the lowest conduction band and the top of the highest valence band are indicated by S + 1 and S - 2 in Fig. 21(b ). Since these two bands have opposite parity, each level crossing between them is a topological phase transition between trivial and QSH insulator phases (Bernevig et al., 2006; Fu and Kane, 2007) . Since the system must be trivial in the limit d → 0, we know that the first QSH insulator phase occurs between the first and second level crossing. In the A 1 → 0 limit, the crossing positions are given by the critical well thicknesses d cn = nπ B1

|M| . In principle, there is an infinite number of QSH phases between d c,2n-1 and d c,2n . However, as seen in Fig. 21(b) , the gap between |S + 1 and |S - 2 decays quickly for large d. In the 3D limit d → ∞, the two states become degenerate and actually form the top and bottom surface states of the bulk crystal [Fig. 21(c)] .

This relation between the QW valence and conduction bands and the surface states in the d → ∞ limit suggests an alternative way to understand the crossover from 3D to 2D, i.e. from the surface states. In the 3D limit the two surfaces are decoupled and are the only low-energy states. The top surface is described by the effective Hamiltonian (34) while the bottom surface is obtained from the top surface by inversion.

Therefore, the complete effective Hamiltonian is given by

.

When a slab of finite thickness is considered, the two surface states start overlapping, such that off-diagonal terms are introduced in the effective Hamiltonian. An effective Hamiltonian consistent with inversion and TR symmetry and incorporating inter-surface tunneling is given by

where M 2D is a TR invariant mass term due to inter-surface tunneling, which generally depends on the in-plane momentum. Equation ( 36 ) is unitarily equivalent to the BHZ Hamiltonian (2) for HgTe QWs. Whether the Hamiltonian corresponds to a trivial or QSH insulator cannot be determined without studying the behavior of this model at large momenta. Indeed, we are missing a regularization term which would play the role of the quadratic term Bk 2 in the BHZ model (Sec. II.A). However, the transitions between trivial and nontrivial phases are accompanied by a sign change in M 2D , independently of the regularization scheme at high momenta. Upon variation of d, the sign of the inter-surface coupling M 2D oscillates because the surface state wave functions oscillate [Fig. 21(b) ]. Therefore, we reach the same conclusions as in the bulk approach.

The results above obtained from calculations using an effective model are also confirmed by first-principle calculations. The parity eigenvalues of occupied bands have been calculated as a function of the thickness of the 3D topological insulator film (Liu et al., 2010) , from which the topological nature of the film can be inferred. The result is shown in Fig. 21(d) , which confirms the oscillations found in the effective model. The first nontrivial phase appears at a thickness of three quintuple layers, i.e. about 3 nm for Bi 2 Se 3 .

In previous subsections, we have reviewed bulk and surface properties of 3D topological insulators, as well as their relation to 2D topological insulators (QSH insulators), based on a microscopic model. From the effective model of surface states, one can understand their robustness protected by TR symmetry. However, similarly to the quantized Hall response in QH systems, the topological structure in topological insulators should not only lead to robust gapless surface states, but also to unique, quantized electromagnetic response coefficients. The quantized electromagnetic response of 3D topological insulators turns out to be a topological magnetoelectric effect (TME) (Qi et al., 2008 (Qi et al., , 2009)) , which occurs when TR symmetry is broken on the surface, but not in the bulk. The TME effect is a generic property of 3D topological insulators, which can be obtained theoretically from generic models and from an effective field theory approach (Essin et al., 2009; Fu and Kane, 2007; Qi et al., 2008) , independently of microscopic details. However, in order to develop a physical intuition for the TME effect, in the section we review this effect and its physical consequences based on the simplest surface effective model, and postpone a discussion in the framework of a general effective theory to Sec. IV. We shall also discuss various experimental manifestations of the TME effect.

We start by analyzing generic perturbations to the effective surface state Hamiltonian (34).

The only momentum-independent perturbation one can add is H 1 = a=x,y,z m a σ a , and the perturbed Hamiltonian has the spectrum

z . Thus, the only parameter that can open a gap and destabilize the surface states is m z , and we will only consider this perturbation in the following. The mass term m z σ z is odd under TR, as expected from the topological stability of surface states protected by TR symmetry. By comparison, if the surface states consist of even number of Dirac cones, one can check that a TR invariant mass term is indeed possible. For example, if there are two identical Dirac cones, an imaginary coupling between the cones can be introduced, which leads to the gapped TR invariant Hamiltonian

From such a difference between an even and an odd number of Dirac cones, one sees that the stability of the surface theory ( 34 ) is protected by a Z 2 topological invariant.

Although the surface state with a single Dirac cone does not remain gapless when a TR breaking mass term m z σ z is added, an important physical property is induced by such a mass term: a half-integer quantized Hall conductance. As discussed in Sec. II.E, the Hall conductance of a generic two-band Hamiltonian h(k) = d a (k)σ a is determined by Eq. ( 29

From this formula, it can be seen that the Hall conductance remains finite even in the limit m z → 0, and has a jump at m z = 0. As a property of the massive Dirac model, such a half Hall conductance has been studied a long time ago in high energy physics. In that context, the effect is termed the "parity anomaly" (Redlich, 1984; Semenoff, 1984) , because the massless theory preserves parity (and TR) but an infinitesimal mass term necessarily breaks these symmetries.

The analysis above only applies if the continuum effective model (34) applies, i.e. if the characteristic momentum |m z |/A 2 is much smaller than the size of the Brillouin zone 2π/a with a the lattice constant. Since deviations from this Dirac-type effective model at large momenta is not included in the above calculation of the Hall conductance (Fu and Kane, 2007; Lee, 2009) , one cannot unambiguously predict the Hall conductance of the surface. In fact, if the effective theory describes a 2D system rather than the surface of a 3D system, additional contributions from large-momentum corrections to the effective model are necessary, since the Hall condutance of any gapped 2D band insulator must be quantized in integer units of e 2 /h (Thouless et al., 1982) . For example, the QAH insulator [Eq. ( 28 )] with mass term M → 0 is also described by the same effective theory as ( 37 ), but has Hall conductance 0 or 1 rather than ±1/2 (Fradkin et al., 1986) .

Interestingly, the surface of a 3D topological insulator is different from all 2D insulators, in the sense that such contributions from large momenta vanish due to the requirement of TR symmetry (Qi et al., 2008) . This fact is discussed more rigorously in Sec. IV based on the general effective field theory. Here we present an argument based on the bulk to surface relationship. To understand this, consider the jump in Hall conductance at m z = 0. Although deviations from the Dirac effective model at large momenta may lead to corrections to the Hall conductance for a given m z , the change in Hall conductance ∆σ

is independent of the large-momentum contributions. Indeed, the effect of the mass term m z σ z on the large-momentum sector of the theory is negligible as long as m z → 0. Therefore, any contributions to σ H from large momenta should be continuous functions of m z , and thus cannot affect the value of the discontinuity ∆σ H . On the other hand, since the surface theory with m z = 0 is TR invariant, TR transforms the system with mass m z to that with mass -m z . Consequently, from TR symmetry we have

Together with the condition ∆σ H = mz |mz| e 2 h , we see that the half Hall conductance given by Eq. ( 38 ) is robust, and the contribution from large-momentum corrections must vanish. By comparison, in a 2D QAH Hamiltonian discussed in Sec. II.E, i.e. the upper 2 × 2 block of Eq. ( 2 ), the Hamiltonian with mass M is not the TR conjugate of that with mass -M , and the above argument does not apply. Therefore, the half Hall conductance is a unique property of the surface states of 3D topological insulators which is determined by the bulk topology. This property distinguishes the surface states of 3D topological insulators from all pure 2D systems, or topologically trivial surface states.

The analysis above has only considered translationally invariant perturbations to the surface states, but the conclusions remain robust when disorder is considered. A 2D metal without SOC belongs to the orthogonal or unitary symmetry classes of random Hamiltonians, the eigenfunctions of which are always localized when random disorder is introduced. This effect is known as Anderson localization (Abrahams et al., 1979) . Anderson localization is a quantum interference effect induced by constructive interference between different backscattering paths. By comparison, a system with TR invariance and SOC belongs to the symplectic class, where the constructive interference becomes destructive. In that case, the system has a metallic phase at weak disorder, which turns into an insulator phase by going through a metal-insulator transition at a certain disorder strength (Evers and Mirlin, 2008; Hikami et al., 1980) . Naively, one would expect the surface state with nonmagnetic disorder to be in the symplectic class. However, Nomura, Koshino, and Ryu showed that the surface state is metallic even for an arbitrary impurity strength (Nomura et al., 2007) , which is consistent with the topological robustness of the surface state.

On the contrary, with TR symmetry breaking disorder, the system belongs to the unitary class, which exhibits localization for arbitrarily weak disorder strength. While the longitudinal resistivity flows to infinity due to localization, the Hall conductivity flows to the quantized value ±e 2 /2h (Nomura et al., 2008) . Therefore, the system enters a half QH phase once an infinitesimal TR symmetry breaking perturbation is introduced, independently of the detailed form of the TR breaking perturbation. Physically, TR breaking disorder is induced by magnetic impurities, the spin of which not only contributes a random TR breaking field, but also has its own dynamics. For example, the simplest exchange interaction between impurity spin and surface state can be written as

with S i the impurity spin, ψ † σψ(R i ) the spin density of surface electrons at the impurity position R i , and J i the exchange coupling. To understand the physical properties of the topological insulator surface in the presence of magnetic impurities, it is instructive to study the interaction between impurity spins mediated by the surface electrons (Liu et al., 2009) . As in a usual Fermi liquid, if the surface state has a finite Fermi wave vector k F , a Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction between the impurity spins is introduced, the sign of which oscillates with wave length ∝ 1/2k F (Liu et al., 2009; Ye et al., 2010) . If the Fermi level is close to the Dirac point, i.e. k F → 0, the sign of the RKKY interaction does not oscillate but is uniform. The sign of the resulting uniform spin-spin interaction is determined by the coupling to the surface electrons, which turns out to be ferromagnetic. Physically, the interaction is ferromagnetic rather than antiferromagnetic, because a uniform spin polarization can maximize the gap opened on the surface, which is energetically favorable. Due to this ferromagnetic spin-spin interaction, the system can order ferromagnetically when the chemical potential is near the Dirac point (Liu et al., 2009) . This mechanism is of great practical importance, because it provides a way to generate a surface TR symmetry breaking field by coating the surface with magnetic impurities and tuning the chemical potential near the Dirac point (Cha et al., 2010; Chen and Wan, 2010; Feng et al., 2009; Tran and Kim, 2010; Zitko, 2010) .

As discussed above, the surface half QH effect is a unique property of a TR symmetry breaking surface, and is determined by the bulk topology, independently of details of the surface TR symmetry breaking perturbation. A key difference between the surface half QH effect and the usual integer QH effect is that the former cannot be measured by a dc transport experiment. An integer QH system has chiral edge states which contribute to the quantized Hall current while being connected to leads. However, as one can easily convince oneself, it is a simple mathematical fact that the surface of a finite sample of 3D topological insulator is always a closed manifold without an edge. If the whole surface of a topolog-ical insulator sample is gapped by magnetic impurities, there are no edge states to carry a dc transport current. If the magnetic impurities form a ferromagnetic phase and there is a domain wall in the magnetic moment, the Hall conductance has a jump at the domain wall due to the formula (38). In this case, the jump of Hall conductance is e 2 /h across the domain wall, so that a chiral gapless edge state propagates along the domain wall [Fig. 22(a) ] (Qi et al., 2008) . This mechanism provides another route towards the QAH effect without any external magnetic field and the associated LLs. This is very much alike the boundary between two ordinary QH states with Hall conductance ne 2 /h and (n + 1)e 2 /h. The wave function for an edge state along a straight domain wall can also be solved for analytically following the same procedure as that used in Sec. II.B. Interestingly, if one attaches voltage and current leads to the domain wall in the same way as for an ordinary Hall bar, one should observe a Hall conductance of e 2 /h rather than e 2 /2h, since the domain wall chiral state behaves in the same way as the edge state of a σ H = e 2 /h QH system. Thus again we see that from dc transport measurements, one cannot observe the half Hall conductance.

Such a difference between integer QH effect and surface half QH effect indicates that the surface half QH effect is actually a new topological phenomenon which, in terms of its observable consequences, is qualitatively different from the usual integer QH effect. Alternatively, the proper detection of this new topological phenomenon actually probes a unique electromagnetic response property of the bulk, the TME (Essin et al., 2009; Qi et al., 2008) . A magnetoelectric effect is defined as a magnetization induced by an electric field, or alternatively, a charge polarization induced by a magnetic field. To understand the relation between surface half QH effect and magnetoelectric effect, consider the configuration shown in Fig. 22(b) , where the side surface of a 3D topological insulator is covered by magnetic impurities with ferromagnetic order, so that the surface is gapped and exhibits a half quantized Hall conductance. When an electric field E is applied parallel to the surface, a Hall current j is induced [Eq. ( 39 )], which circulates along the surface. This surface current perpendicular to E will then induce a magnetic field parallel to E, so that the system exhibits a magnetoelectric response. The Hall response equation is written as

with n a unit vector normal to the surface, and the sign of the mass m/|m| is determined by the direction of the surface magnetization. Such a Hall response is equivalent to a magnetization proportional to the electric field:

This magnetization is a topological response to the electric field, and is independent of the details of the system. Similarly, a topological contribution to the charge polarization can be induced by a magnetic field. The complete electromagnetic response of the system is described by the following modified constituent equations,

with α = e 2 / c the fine structure constant, and P 3 ≡ m/2|m| = ±1/2 the quantum of Hall conductance. A detailed explanation of the coefficient P 3 and the effective field theory description of the TME effect is discussed in Sec. IV.

In this section we focus on the physical consequences of the TME effect. We simply note the fact that more generally, for topological insulators P 3 can take the value n + 1/2 with arbitrary integer n, since the number of Dirac cones on the surface can be any odd integer.

One of the most direct consequences of the TME effect is the image magnetic monopole effect (Qi et al., 2009) . Consider bringing an electric charge to the proximity of an ordinary 3D insulator. The electric charge will polarize the dielectric, which can be described by the appearance of an image electric charge inside the insulator. If the same thing is done with a topological insulator, in addition to the image electric charge an image magnetic monopole will also appear inside the insulator.

This image magnetic monopole effect can be studied straightforwardly by solving Maxwell's equations with the modified constituent equations (40), in the same way as the image charge problem in an ordinary insulator. Consider the geometry shown in Fig. 23(a ). The lower half-space z &lt; 0 is occupied by a topological insulator with dielectric constant ǫ 2 and magnetic permeability µ 2 , while the upper half-space z &gt; 0 is occupied by a conventional insulator with dielectric constant ǫ 1 and magnetic permeability µ 1 . An electric point charge q is located at (0, 0, d) with d &gt; 0. We assume that the surface states are gapped by some local TR symmetry breaking field m, so that the surface half QH effect and TME exist. The boundary of the topological insulator acts as a domain wall where P 3 jumps from 1/2 to 0. In this semi-infinite geometry, an image point magnetic monopole with flux g 2 is located at the mirror position (0, 0, -d), together with an image electric point charge q 2 . Physically, the magnetic field of such an image monopole configuration is induced by circulating Hall currents on the surface, which are induced by the electric field of the external charge. A similar effect has been studied in the integer QH effect (Haldane and Chen, 1983 ). Conversely, the electromagnetic field strength inside the topological insulator is described by an image magnetic monopole g 1 and electric charge q 1 in the upper half-space, at the same point as the external charge. The image magnetic monopole flux and image electric charge (q 1 , g 1 ) and (q 2 , g 2 ) are given by

Interestingly, by making use of electric-magnetic duality these expressions can be simplified to more compact forms (Karch, 2009) .

Moreover, interesting phenomena appear when we consider the dynamics of the external charge. For example, consider a 2D electron gas at a distance d above the surface of the 3D topological insulator. If the motion of the electron is slow enough (with respect to the time scale /m corresponding to the TR symmetry breaking gap m), the image monopole will follow the electron adiabatically, such that the electron forms an electron-monopole composite, i.e. a dyon (Witten, 1979) . When two electrons wind around each other, each electron perceives the magnetic flux of the image monopole attached to the other electron, which leads to statistical transmutation. The statistical angle is determined by the electron charge and image monopole flux as

The image monopole can be detected directly by local probes sensitive to small magnetic fields, such as scanning superconducting quantum interference devices (scanning SQUID) and scanning magnetic force microscopy (scanning MFM) (Qi et al., 2009) . The current due to the image monopole can also be detected in principle (Zang and Nagaosa, 2010) .

Another way to detect the TME effect is through the transmission and reflection of polarized light. When linearly polarized light propagates through a medium which breaks TR symmetry, the plane of polarization of the transmitted light may be rotated, which is known as the Faraday effect (Landau and Lifshitz, 1984) . A similar rotation may occur for light reflected by a TR symmetry breaking surface, which is known as the magneto-optical Kerr effect (Landau and Lifshitz, 1984) . Since the bulk of the topological insulator is TR invariant, no Faraday rotation will occur in the bulk. However, if TR symmetry is broken on the surface, the TME effect occurs and a unique kind of Kerr and Faraday rotation is induced on the surface. Physically, the plane of polarization of the transmitted and reflected light is rotated because the electric field E 0 (r, t) of linearly polarized light generates a magnetic field B(r, t) in the same direction, due to the TME effect. Similarly as for the image monopole effect, the Faraday and Kerr rotation angles can be calculated by solving Maxwell's equations with the modified constituent equations (40). In the simplest case of a single surface between a trivial insulator and a semi-infinite topological insulator [Fig. 24(a) ], the rotation angle for light incident from the trivial insulator is given by (Karch, 2009; Maciejko et al., 2010; Qi et al., 2008; Tse and MacDonald, 2010 )

where ǫ 1 , µ 1 are the dielectric constant and magnetic permeability of the trivial insulator, and ǫ 2 , µ 2 are those of the topological insulator. Although the surface Faraday and Kerr rotations are induced by the topological property of the bulk, and are determined by the magnetoelectric response with quantized coefficient αP 3 , the rotation angle is not universal and depends on the material parameters ǫ and µ. The TME response always coexists with the ordinary electromagnetic response, which makes it difficult to observe the topological quantization phenomenon. However, recently new proposals have been made to avoid the dependence on non-universal material parameters (Maciejko et al., 2010; Tse and MacDonald, 2010) . The key idea is to consider a slab of topological insulator of finite thickness with two surfaces, with vacuum on one side and a substrate on the other [Fig. 24(b) ]. The combination of Kerr and Faraday angles measured at reflectivity minima provides enough information to determine the quantized coefficient αP 3 (Maciejko et al., 2010) ,

provided that both top and bottom surfaces have the same surface Hall conductance σ H = P 3 e 2 /h. In Eq. ( 45 ), the quantized coefficient αP 3 is expressed solely in terms of the measurable Kerr and Faraday angles. This enables a direct experimental measurement of P 3 without a separate measurement of the non-universal optical constants ǫ, µ of the topological insulator film and the substrate. If the two surfaces have different surface Hall conductances, it is still possible to determine them separately through a measurement of the Kerr and Faraday angles at reflectivity maxima (Maciejko et al., 2010) .

The TME has other interesting consequences. The TME effect corresponds to a term θE • B in the action (see Sec. IV for more details), which mediates the transmutation between electric field and magnetic field (Qi et al., 2008) . In the presence of a magnetic monopole, such an electric-magnetic transmutation induces an electric field around the magnetic monopole, so that the monopole carries an electric charge (Witten, 1979) q = e θ 2π g φ0 with φ 0 = hc/e the flux quanta. Such a composite particle carries both magnetic flux and electric charge, and is called a dyon. In principle, the topological insulator provides a physical system which can detect a magnetic monopole through this effect (Rosenberg and Franz, 2010) . For a topological insulator, we have θ = π which corresponds to a half charge q = e/2 for a monopole with unit flux. Such a half charge corresponds to a zero energy bound state induced by the monopole. The charge of the monopole is e/2 when the bound state is occupied, and -e/2 when it is unoccupied. Such a half charge and zero mode is similar to charge fractionalization in 1D systems (Su et al., 1979) . If the monopole passes through a hole in the topological insulator, the charge will follow it, which corresponds to a charge pumping effect (Rosenberg et al., 2010) .

All effects discussed up to this point are consequences of the TME in a topological insulator with surface TR symmetry breaking. No effects of electron correlation have been taken into account. When the electron-electron interaction is considered, interesting new effects can occur. For example, if a topological insulator is realized by transition metal compounds with strong electron correlation effects, antiferromagnetic (AFM) long-range order may develop in this material. Since the AFM order breaks TR symmetry and inversion symmetry, the magnetoelectric coefficient P 3 defined in Eq. ( 40 ) deviates from its quantized value n+1/2. Denoting by n(r, t) the AFM Néel vector, we have P 3 (n) = P 3 (n = 0) + δP 3 (n) where P 3 (n = 0) is the quantized value of P 3 in the absence of AFM order. This change in the magnetoelectric coefficient has interesting consequences when spin-wave excitations are considered. Fluctuations of the Néel vector δn(r, t) induce in general fluctuations of δP 3 , leading to a coupling between spin-waves and the electromagnetic field (Li et al., 2010) . In high-energy physics, such a particle coupled to the E • B term is called an "axion" (Peccei and Quinn, 1977; Wilczek, 2009) . Physically, in a background magnetic field such an "axionic" spin-wave is coupled to the electric field with a coupling constant tunable by the magnetic field. Consequently, a polariton can be formed by the hybridization of the spin-wave and photon, similar to the polariton formed by optical phonons (Mills and Burstein, 1974) . The polariton gap is controlled by the magnetic field, which may realize a tunable optical modulator.

Another interesting effect emerges from electron correlations when a thin film of topological insulator is considered. When the film is thick enough so that there is no direct tunneling between the surface states on the top and bottom surfaces, but not too thick so that the long-range Coulomb interaction between the two surfaces are still important, a intersurface particle-hole excitation, i.e. an exciton, can be induced (Seradjeh et al., 2009) . Denoting the fermion annihilation operator on the two surfaces by ψ 1 , ψ 2 , the exciton creation operator is ψ † 1 ψ 2 . In particular, when the two surfaces have opposite Fermi energy with respect to the Dirac point, there is nesting between the two Fermi surfaces, which leads to an instability towards exciton condensation. In the exciton condensate phase, the exciton creation operator acquires a nonzero expectation value ψ † 1 ψ 2 = 0, which corresponds to an effective inter-surface tunneling. Interestingly, one can consider a vortex in this exciton condensate. Such a vortex corresponds to a complex spatially-dependent inter-surface tunneling amplitude, and is equivalent to a magnetic monopole. According to the Witten effect mentioned above (Rosenberg and Franz, 2010) , such a vortex of the exciton condensate carries charge ±e/2, which provides a way to test the Witten effect in the absence of a real magnetic monopole.

Besides the effects discussed above, there are many other physical effects related to the TME effect, or surface half QH effect. When a magnetic layer is deposited on top of the topological insulator surface, the surface states can be gapped and a half QH effect is induced. In other words, the magnetic moment of the magnetic layer determines the Hall response of the surface states, which can be considered as a coupling between the magnetic moment and the surface electric current (Qi et al., 2008) . Such a coupling leads to the inverse of the half QH effect, which means that a charge current on the surface can flip the magnetic moment of the magnetic layer (Garate and Franz, 2010) . Similar to such a coupling between charge current and magnetic moment, a charge density is coupled to magnetic textures such as domain walls and vortices (Nomura and Nagaosa, 2010) . This effect can be used to drive magnetic textures by electric fields. These effects on a topological insulator surface coupled with magnetic layers are relevant to potential applications of topological insulators in designing new spintronics devices.

There have been many interesting theoretical proposals for novel effects in topological insulators, but perhaps the most exciting aspect of the field is the rapid increase in experimental efforts focussed on topological insulators. High-quality materials are being produced in several groups around the world, and of all different types. Bulk materials were first grown for experiments on topological insulators in the Cava group at Princeton University including the Bi 1-x Sb x alloy (Hsieh et al., 2008) and Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 crystals (Hsieh et al., 2009; Xia et al., 2009) . Crystalline samples of Bi 2 Te 3 have also been grown at Stanford University in the Fisher group (Chen et al., 2009) . In addition to bulk samples, Bi 2 Se 3 nanoribbons (Hong et al., 2010; Kong et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2010) have been fabricated in the Cui group at Stanford University, and thin films of Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 have been grown by MBE by the Xue group at Tsinghua University (Li et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009) , as well as other groups (Li et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) . Thin films can also be obtained by exfoliation from bulk samples (Hong et al., 2010; Shahil et al., 2010; Teweldebrhan et al., 2010) . The stoichiometric compounds Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 are not extremely difficult to grow, which should allow more experimental groups to have access to high-quality topological insulator samples (Butch et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) . due to intrinsic doping from vacancy and anti-site defects, Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 (Chen et al., 2009; Hsieh et al., 2009; Xia et al., 2009) are shown to contain n-type carriers while Sb 2 Te 3 (Hsieh et al., 2009) is ptype. Consequently, controllable extrinsic doping is required to tune the Fermi energy to the Dirac point of the surface states. For example, Bi 2 Te 3 can be doped with Sn (Chen et al., 2009) and Bi 2 Se 3 can be doped with Sb (Analytis et al., 2010) or Ca (Hor et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010) . Furthermore, it is found that doping Bi 2 Se 3 with Cu can induce superconductivity (Hor et al., 2010) , while Fe and Mn dopants may yield ferromagnetism (Cha et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2010; Hor et al., 2010; Wray et al., 2010; Xia et al., 2008) .

ARPES experiments are uniquely positioned to detect the topological surface states. The first experiments on topological insulators were ARPES experiments carried out on the Bi 1-x Sb x alloy (Hsieh et al., 2008) . The observation of five branches of surface states, together with the respective spin polarizations determined later by spin-resolved ARPES (Hsieh et al., 2009) , confirms the nontrivial topological nature of the surface states of Bi 1-x Sb x .

ARPES work on Bi 2 Se 3 (Xia et al., 2009) and Bi 2 Te 3 (Chen et al., 2009; Hsieh et al., 2009) soon followed. Unlike the multiple branches of surface states observed for Bi 1-x Sb x , these experiments report a remarkably simple surface state spectrum with a single Dirac cone located at the Γ point and a large bulk band gap, in accordance with the theoretical predictions. For Bi 2 Se 3 , a single Dirac cone with linear dispersion is clearly shown at the Γ point within the band gap in Fig. 25(a ) and (b). Figure 25(d) shows the y component of the spin polarization along the k x ( Γ -M ) direction measured by spin-resolved ARPES (Hsieh et al., 2009) . The opposite spin polarization in the y direction for opposite k indicates the helical nature of the spin polarization for surface states. As discussed above, Bi 2 Se 3 has a finite density of n-type carriers due to intrinsic doping. Therefore, the above ARPES data [Fig. 25(a), (b) ] shows that the Fermi energy is above the conduction band bottom and the sample is, in fact, a metal rather than an insulator in the bulk. To obtain a true topological insulating state with the Fermi energy tuned into the bulk gap, careful control of external doping is required. Such control was first reported by Chen et al. [Fig. 26] for a sample of Bi 2 Te 3 with 0.67% Sn doping (Chen et al., 2009) . Some recent work on Sb 2 Te 3 (Hsieh et al., 2009) supports the theoretical prediction that this material is also a topological insulator (Zhang et al., 2009) . This family of materials is c ) can be extracted. From Xia et al., 2009 and Hsieh et al., 2009. moving to the forefront of research on topological insulators due to the large bulk gap and the simplicity of the surface state spectrum.

Although the simple model ( 101 ) captures most of the surface state physics of these systems, experiments report a hexagonal surface state Fermi surface [Fig. 26 ], while Eq. ( 101 ) only describes a circular Fermi surface sufficiently close to the Dirac point. However, such a hexagonal warping effect can be easily taken into account by including an additional term in the surface Hamiltonian which is cubic in k (Fu, 2009) . The surface Hamiltonian for Bi 2 Te 3 can be written

where E 0 (k) = k 2 /(2m * ) breaks the particle-hole symmetry, the Dirac velocity v k = v(1 + αk 2 ) acquires a quadratic dependence on k, and λ parameterizes the amount of hexagonal warping (Fu, 2009) .

In addition to its usefulness for studying bulk crystalline samples, ARPES has also been used to characterize the thin films of Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 (Li et al., 2009; Sakamoto et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) . The thin films were grown to initiate a study of the crossover (Liu et al., 2010) from a 3D topological insulator to a 2D QSH state (Sec. III.C). In Fig. 27 , ARPES spectra are shown for several thicknesses of a Bi 2 Se 3 thin film, which show the evolution of the surface states.

In addition to the ARPES characterization of 3D topological insulators, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) provide another kind of surface-sensitive technique to probe the topological surface states. A set of materials have been investigated in STM/STS experiments: Bi 1-x Sb x (Roushan et al., 2009) , Bi 2 Te 3 (Alpichshev et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) , and Sb (Gomes et al., 2009) . (Although Sb is topologically nontrivial, it is a semi-metal instead of an insulator.) The comparison between STM/STS and ARPES was first performed for Bi 2 Te 3 (Alpichshev et al., 2010) , where it was found that the integrated density of states obtained from ARPES [Fig. 28(a) ] agrees well with the differential conductance dI/dV obtained from STS measurements [Fig. 28(b) ]. From such a comparison, different characteristic energies (E F , E A , E B , E C and E D in Fig. 28 ) can be easily and unambiguously identified.

Besides the linear Dirac dispersion which has already been well established by ARPES experiments, STM/STS can provide further information about the topological nature of the surface states, such as the interference patterns of impurities or edges (Alpichshev et al., 2010; Gomes et al., 2009; Roushan et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009) . When there are impurities on the surface of a topological insulator, the surface states will be scattered and form an interference pattern around the impurities. Fourier transforming the inter- ference pattern into momentum space, one can quantitatively extract the scattering intensity for a fixed energy and scattering wave vector. With such information one can determine what types of scattering events are suppressed. Figure 29(a) and (c) shows the interference pattern in momentum space for Bi x Sb 1-x (Roushan et al., 2009) and Bi 2 Te 3 (Zhang et al., 2009) , respectively. In order to analyze the interference pattern (Lee et al., 2009) , we take Bi 2 Te 3 as an example [Fig. 29(c), (d) ]. The surface Fermi surface of Bi 2 Te 3 is shown in Fig. 29(d) , for which the possible scattering events are dominated by the wave vectors q 1 along the K direction, q 2 along the M direction and q 3 between the K and M directions. However, from Fig. 29(c ) we see that there is a peak along the Γ -M direction, while scattering along the Γ -K direction is suppressed. This observation coincides with the theoretical prediction that backscattering between k and -k is forbidden due to TR symmetry, which supports the topological nature of the surface states. Other related theoretical analysis are also consistent (Biswas and Balatsky, 2010; Guo and Franz, 2010; Zhou et al., 2009) . A similar analysis can be applied to the surface of Bi x Sb 1-x , and the obtained pattern [Fig. 29(b) ] also agrees well with the experimental data [Fig. 29(a) ] (Roushan et al., 2009) . More recently, STM experiments have further demonstrated that the topological surface states can penetrate barriers while maintaining their extended nature (Seo et al., 2010) .

Another important result of STM/STS measurements is the observation of surface state LLs in a magnetic field (Cheng et al., 2010; Hanaguri et al., 2010) . As shown in Fig. 30 (a) and (b), discrete LLs appear as a series of peaks in the differential conductance spectrum (dI/dV ), which supports the 2D nature of the surface states. Further analysis on the dependence of the LLs on the magnetic field B shows that the energy of the LLs is proportional to √ nB where n is the Landau level index, instead of the usual linear-in-B dependence. This unusual dependence provides additional evidence for the existence of surface states consisting of massless Dirac fermions. Furthermore, the narrow peaks in the spectrum also indicate the good quality of the sample surface.

In addition to the above surface-sensitive techniques, a large effort has been devoted to transport measurements including dc transport (Analytis et al., 2010; Butch et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2010; Eto et al., 2010; Steinberg et al., 2010; Tang et al., 2010) and measurements in the microwave (Analytis et al., 2010) and infrared regimes (Butch et al., 2010; LaForge et al., 2010; Sushkov et al., 2010) , which are necessary steps towards the direct measurement of topological effects such as the TME, and for future device applications. However, transport experiments on topological insulators turn out to be much more difficult than surface-sensitive measurements such as ARPES and STM. The main difficulty arises from the existence of a finite residual bulk carrier density. Materials such as Bi 1-x Sb x or Bi 2 Se 3 are predicted to be topological FIG. 30 Tunneling spectra for the surface of Bi2Se3 in a magnetic field, showing a series of peaks attributed to the occurrence of surface Landau levels. From Cheng et al., 2010 and Hanaguri et al., 2010. insulators if they are perfectly crystalline. However, real materials always have impurities and defects such as anti-sites and vacancies. Therefore, as-grown materials are not truly insulating but have a finite bulk carrier density. As discussed in Sec. III.E.2, such a residual bulk carrier density is also observed in ARPES for Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 (Chen et al., 2009; Hsieh et al., 2009) . From the ARPES results it seems that the residual carrier density can be compensated for by chemical doping (Chen et al., 2009) . Nevertheless, in transport experiments the compensation of bulk carriers appears to be much more difficult. Even samples which appear as bulk insulators in ARPES experiments still exhibit some finite bulk carrier density in transport measurements (Analytis et al., 2010) , which suggests the existence of an offset between bulk and surface Fermi levels. Another difficulty in transport measurements is that a cleaved surface rapidly becomes heavily n-doped when exposed to air. This leads to further discrepancies between the surface condition observed in transport and surface-sensitive measurements.

In spite of the complexity described above, the signature of 2D surface states in transport experiments has been recently reported (Analytis et al., 2010; Ayala-Valenzuela et al., 2010) .

For example, Fig. 31 shows results obtained by microwave spectroscopy (Ayala-Valenzuela et al., 2010) on Bi 2 Se 3 , where it is found that the cyclotron resonance frequency only scales with perpendicular magnetic field B ⊥ , suggesting the 2D nature of the resonance. Similarly, the dependence of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations on the angle of the magnetic field can help to distinguish the 2D surface states from the 3D bulk states, both for Bi 2 Se 3 (Ayala-Valenzuela et al., 2010) and Bi x Sb 1-x (Taskin and Ando, 2009) . Signatures of the topological surface states have also been searched for in the temperature dependence of the resistance (Analytis et al., 2010; Checkelsky et al., 2010 Checkelsky et al., , 2009)) , the magnetoresistance (Tang et al., 2010) , and weak antilocalization ef- fects (Checkelsky et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2010) . However, besides the experiments mentioned above with positive evidence for the existence of topological surface states, some experiments show that the transport data can be entirely explained by bulk carriers (Butch et al., 2010; Eto et al., 2010) . The resolution of this controversy requires further improvements in experiments and sample quality.

To reach the intrinsic topological insulator state without bulk carriers, various efforts have been made to reduce the bulk carrier density. One approach consists in compensating the bulk carriers by chemical doping, e.g. doping Bi 2 Se 3 with Sb (Analytis et al., 2010) , Ca (Hor et al., 2009) , or doping Bi 2 Te 3 with Sn (Chen et al., 2009) . Although chemical doping is an efficient way to reduce the bulk carrier density, the mobility will be usually reduced due to foreign dopants. However, we note that the substitution of the isovalent Bi with Sb can reduce the carrier density but still keep high mobilities (Analytis et al., 2010) . Also, it is difficult to achieve accurate tuning of the carrier density by chemical doping, because each different chemical doping level needs to be reached by growing a new sample. The second method consists in suppressing the contribution of bulk carriers to transport by reducing the sample size down to the nanoscale, such as quasi-1D nanoribbons (Kong et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2010; Steinberg et al., 2010) , or quasi-2D thin film (Checkelsky et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2010; Li et al., 2009) . In Fig. 32 , the magnetoresistance of a nanoribbon exhibits a primary hc/e oscillation, which corresponds to Aharonov-Bohm oscillations of the surface state around the surface of the nanoribbon (Peng et al., 2010) . This oscillation also indicates that the bulk carrier density has been reduced greatly so that the contribution of the surface states can be observed. The Aharonov-Bohm oscillation has also been investigated theoretically (Bardarson et al., 2010; Zhang and Vishwanath, 2010) . An important advantage of a sample of mesoscopic size is the possibility of tuning the carrier density by an external gate voltage. Gate control of the carrier density is rather important because it can tune the bulk carrier density continuously while preserving the quality of the sample. Gate control of the carrier density has been indeed observed in nanoribbons of Bi 2 Se 3 (Steinberg et al., 2010) , mechanically exfoliated thin films (Checkelsky et al., 2010) , or epitaxially grown thin films (Chen et al., 2010) . In particular, tuning of the carrier polarity from n-type to p-type has been reported (Checkelsky et al., 2010) , where the change in polarity corresponds to a sign change of the Hall resistance R yx in a magnetic field [Fig. 33(b) ].

The topological materials HgTe, Bi 2 Se 3 , Bi 2 Te 3 and Sb 2 Te 3 not only provide us with a prototype material for 2D and 3D topological insulators, but also give us a rule of thumb to search for new topological insulator materials. The nontrivial topological property of topological insulators originates from the inverted band structure induced by SOC. Therefore, it is more likely to find topological insulators in materials which consist of covalent compounds with narrow band gaps and heavy atoms with strong SOC. Following such a guiding principle, a large number of topological insulator materials have been proposed recently, which can be roughly classified into several different groups.

The first group is similar to the tetradymite semiconductors, where the atomic p-orbitals of Bi or Sb play an essential role. Thallium-based III-V-VI 2 ternary chalcogenides, including TlBiQ 2 and TlSbQ 2 with Q = Te, Se and S, belong to this class (Lin et al., 2010; Yan et al., 2010) . These materials have the same rhombohedral crystal structure (space group D 5 3d ) as the tetradymite semiconductors, but are genuinely 3D, in con- trast to the layered tetradymite compounds. These materials have recently been experimentally observed to be topological insulators (Chen et al., 2010; Sato et al., 2010) .

A typical material of the second group is distorted bulk HgTe. In contrast to conventional zincblende semiconductors, HgTe has an inverted bulk band structure with the Γ 8 band being higher in energy than the Γ 6 band. However, HgTe by itself is a semi-metal with the Fermi energy at the touching point between the light-hole and heavy-hole Γ 8 bands. Consequently, in order to get a topological insulator, the crystal structure of HgTe should be distorted along the [111] direction to open a gap between the heavy-hole and light-hole bands (Dai et al., 2008) . A similar band structure also exists in ternary Heusler compounds (Chadov et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2010) , and around fifty of them are found to exhibit band inversion. These materials become 3D topological insulators upon distortion, or they can be grown in quantum well form similar to HgTe/CdTe to realize the 2D or the QSH insulators. Due to the diversity of Heusler materials, multifunctional topological insulators can be realized with additional properties ranging from superconductivity to magnetism and heavy-fermion behavior.

Besides the above two large groups of materials, there are also some other theoretical proposals of new topological insulator materials with electron correlation effects. An example is the case of Ir-based materials. The QSH effect has been proposed in Na 2 IrO 3 (Shitade et al., 2009) , and topological Mott insulator phases have been proposed in Ir-based pyrochlore oxides Ln 2 Ir 2 O 7 with Ln = Nd, Pr (Guo and Franz, 2009; Pesin and Balents, 2010; Wan et al., 2010; Yang and Kim, 2010) . Furthermore, a topological structure has also been considered in Kondo insulators, with a possible realization in SmB 6 and CeNiSn (Dzero et al., 2010) .

The TFT (Qi et al., 2008) and the TBT (Fu and Kane, 2007; Fu et al., 2007; Kane and Mele, 2005; Moore and Balents, 2007; Roy, 2009) are two different general theories of the topological insulators. The TBT is valid for the noninteracting system without disorder. The TBT has given sim-ple and important criteria to evaluate which band insulators are topologically non-trivial. The TFT is generally valid for interacting systems including disorder, and the it identifies the physical response associated with the topological order. Remarkably, the TFT reduces exactly to the TBT in the noninteracting limit. In this section, we review both general theories, and also discuss their connections.

We are generally interested in the long-wavelength and lowenergy properties of a condensed matter system. In this case, the details of the microscopic Hamiltonian are not important, and we would like to capture essential physical properties in terms of a low-energy effective field theory. For conventional broken-symmetry states, the low-energy effective field theory is fully determined by the order parameter, symmetry and dimensionality (Anderson, 1997) . Topological states of quantum matter are similarly described by a low-energy effective field theory. In this case, the effective field theory generally involve topological terms which describe the universal topological properties of the state. The coefficient of the topological term can be generally identified as the topological order parameter of the system. A successful example is the TFT of the QH effect (Zhang, 1992) , which captures the universal topological properties such as the quantization of the Hall conductance, the fractional charge and statistics of the quasiparticles and the ground state degeneracy on a topologically nontrivial spatial manifold. In this section, we shall describe the TFT of the TR invariant topological insulators.

We start from the previously mentioned QH system in (2 + 1)D, the TFT for which is given as (Zhang, 1992 )

where the coefficient C 1 is generally given by (Wang et al., 2010 )

and G(k) ≡ G(k, ω) is the imaginary-time single-particle Green's function of a fully interacting insulator, and µ, ν, ρ = 0, 1, 2 ≡ t, x, y. For a general interacting system, assuming that G is nonsingular, we have a map from the three dimensional momentum space to the space of nonsingular Green's functions, belonging to the group GL(n, C), whose third homotopy group is labeled by an integer (Wang et al., 2010) :

The winding number for this homotopy class is exactly measured by C 1 defined in Eq. ( 48 ). Here n ≥ 3 is the number of bands. In the noninteracting limit, C 1 in Eq.( 47 ) can be calculated explicitly from a single Feynman diagram [Fig. 34(a) ] (Golterman et al., 1993; Niemi and Semenoff, 1983; Qi et al., 2008; Volovik, 2002) , and one obtains C 1 as given in Eq. ( 48 ), but with G replaced by the noninteracting Green's function G 0 . Carrying out the frequency integral explicitly, one obtains the TKNN invariant expressed as an integral of the Berry curvature (Thouless et al., 1982) ,

with

Under TR, we have A 0 → A 0 , A → -A, from which we see that the (2 + 1)D CS field theory in Eq. ( 47 ) breaks TR symmetry. All the low-energy response of the QH system can be derived from this TFT. For instance, from the effective Lagrangian in Eq. ( 47 ), taking a functional derivative with respective to A µ , we obtain the current

The spatial component of this current is given by

while the temporal component is given by

This is exactly the QH response with Hall conductance σ H = C 1 /(2π), implying that an electric field induces a transverse current, and a magnetic field induces charge accumulation. The Maxwell term contains more derivatives than the CS term and is therefore less relevant at low energies in the renormalization group sense. Therefore, all the topological response of the QH state is exactly contained in the low-energy TFT of Eq. ( 47 ).

The TFT of the QH effect does not only capture the universal low-energy physics, it also points out a way to generalize the TR symmetry breaking QH state to TR invariant topological states. The CS field theory can be generalized to all odd dimensional spacetimes (Nakahara, 1990) . This observation lead Zhang and Hu to discover a generalization of the QH insulator state (Zhang and Hu, 2001) which is TR invariant, and defined in (4 + 1)D. It is the fundamental TR invariant insulator state from which all the lower-dimensional cases are derived, and is described by the TFT (Bernevig et al., 2002 ) Under TR, we have A 0 → A 0 , A → -A, and this term is explicitly TR invariant. Generally, the coefficient C 2 is expressed in terms of the Green's function of an interacting system as (Wang et al., 2010)

which labels the homotopy group (Wang et al., 2010)

similarly to the case of the (2 + 1)D CS term. For a noninteracting system, C 2 can be calculated from a single Feynman diagram [Fig. 34(b) ] and one obtains C 2 as given in Eq. ( 55 ), with G replaced by the noninteracting Green's function G 0 . Explicit integration over the frequency gives the second Chern number (Qi et al., 2008) ,

with

where i, j, k, ℓ = 1, 2, 3, 4 ≡ x, y, z, w).

Unlike the (2 + 1)D case, the CS term is less relevant than the non-topological Maxwell term in (4 + 1)D, but is still of primary importance when understanding topological phenomena such as the chiral anomaly in a (3+1)D system, which can be regarded as the boundary of a (4 + 1)D system (Qi et al., 2008) . Similar to the (2 + 1)D QH case, the physical response of (4 + 1)D CS insulators is given by

which is the nonlinear response to the external field A µ . To understand this response better, we consider a special field configuration (Qi et al., 2008) :

where x, y, z, w are spatial coordinates and t is time. The only nonvanishing components of the field strength are F xy = B z and F zt = -E z . According to Eq. ( 58 ), this field configuration induces the current

If we integrate the equation above over the x, y dimensions, with periodic boundary conditions and assuming that E z does not depend on x, y, we obtain

where N xy = dxdyB z /2π is the number of flux quanta through the xy plane, which is always quantized to be an integer. This is exactly the 4D generalization of the QH effect mentioned earlier (Zhang and Hu, 2001) . Therefore, from this example we can understand the physical response associated with a nonvanishing second Chern number. In a (4 + 1)D insulator with second Chern number C 2 , a quantized Hall conductance C 2 N xy /2π in the zw plane is induced by a magnetic field with flux 2πN xy in the perpendicular (xy) plane.

We have discussed the CS insulators in (2 + 1)D and (4 + 1)D. Actually, these discussions can be straightforwardly generalized to higher dimensions. In doing so, it is worth noting that there is a even-odd alternation of the homotopy groups of GL(n, C): we have π 2k+1 (GL(n, C)) ∼ = Z, while π 2k (GL(n, C)) = 0. This is the mathematical mechanism underlying the fact that CS insulators of integer class exist in even spatial dimensions, but do not exist in odd spatial dimensions. Reduced to noninteracting insulators, this becomes the alternation of Chern numbers. As a number characteristic of complex fiber bundles, Chern numbers exist only in even spatial dimensions. This is an example of the relationship between homotopy theory and homology theory. We shall see another example of this relationship in the following section: both the Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) terms and the CS terms are well-defined only modulo an integer.

The 4D generalization of the QH effect gives the fundamental TR invariant topological insulator from which all lowerdimensional topological insulators can be derived systematically by a procedure called dimensional reduction (Qi et al., 2008) . Starting from the (4 + 1)D CS field theory in Eq. ( 54 ), we consider field configurations where A µ (x) = A µ (x 0 , x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) is independent of the "extra dimension" x 4 ≡ w, for µ = (x 0 , x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ), and A 4 ≡ A w depending on all coordinates (x 0 , x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , x 4 ). We consider the geometry where the "extra dimension" x 4 forms a small circle. In this case, the x 4 integral in Eq. ( 54 ) can be carried out explicitly. After restoring the unit of electron charge e and flux hc/e following the convention in electrodynamics, we obtain an effective TFT in (3 + 1)D:

where α = e 2 / c ≃ 1/137 is the fine structure constant and θ(x, t) ≡ C 2 φ(x, t) = C 2 dx 4 A 4 (x, t, x 4 ), (62) which can be interpreted as the flux due to the gauge field A 4 (x, t, x 4 ) through the compact extra dimension [Fig. 35 ]. The field θ(x, t) is called the axion field in the field theory literature (Wilczek, 1987) . In order to preserve the spatial and temporal translation symmetry, θ(x, t) can be chosen as a constant parameter rather than a field. Furthermore, we already explained that the original (4 + 1)D CS TFT is TR invariant. Therefore, it is natural to ask how can TR symmetry be preserved in the dimensional reduction. If we choose C 2 = 1, then θ = φ is the magnetic flux threading the compactified circle, and the physics should be invariant under a shift of θ by 2π. TR transforms θ to -θ. Therefore, there are two and only two values of θ which are consistent with TR symmetry, namely θ = 0 and θ = π. In the latter case, TR transforms θ = π to θ = -π, which is equivalent to θ = π mod 2π. We therefore conclude that there are two different classes of TR invariant topological insulators in 3D, the topologically trivial class with θ = 0, and the topologically nontrivial class with θ = π.

As just seen, it is most natural to view the 3D topological insulator as a dimensionally reduced version of the 4D topological insulator. However, for most physical systems in 3D, we are generally given an interacting Hamiltonian, and would like to define a topological order parameter that can be evaluated directly for any 3D model Hamiltonian. Since the θ angle can only take the two values 0 and π in the presence of TR symmetry, it can be naturally defined as the topological order parameter itself. For a generally interacting system, it is given by (Wang et al., 2010) :

where the momentum k = (k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ) is integrated over the 3D Brillouin zone and the frequency k 0 is integrated over

is the imaginary-time single-particle Green's function of the fully interacting many-body system, and G(k, u) for u = 0 is a smooth extension of G(k, u = 0), with a fixed reference value G(k, u = 1) corresponding to the Green's function of a topologically trivial insulating state. G(k, u = 1) can be chosen as a diagonal matrix with G αα = (ik 0 -∆) -1 for empty bands α and G ββ = (ik 0 + ∆) -1 for filled bands β, where ∆ &gt; 0 is independent of k. Even though P 3 is a physical quantity in 3D, a WZW (Witten, 1983 ) type of extension parameter u is introduced in its definition, which plays the role of k 4 in the formula (55) defining the 4D TI. The definition in momentum-space is analogous to the real-space WZW term. Similar to the WZW term, P 3 is only well-defined modulo an integer, and can only take the quantized values of 0 or 1/2 modulo an integer for an TR invariant insulator (Wang et al., 2010) . Essential for the definition of P 3 in Eq. ( 63 ) is the TR invariance identity (Wang et al., 2010) :

which is crucial for the quantization of P 3 . Therefore, we see that unlike the integer-class CS insulators, the Z 2 insulators are symmetry-protected topological insulators. This can be clearly seen from the viewpoint of the topological order parameter. In fact, the quantization of P 3 is protected by TR symmetry. In other words, if TR symmetry in Eq. ( 64 ) is broken, then P 3 can be tuned continuously, and can be adiabatically connected from 1/2 to 0. This is fundamentally different from the CS insulators, for which the coefficient of the CS term given by Eq. ( 55 ) is always quantized to be an integer, regardless of the presence or absence of symmetries. This integer, if nonzero, cannot be smoothly connected to zero provided that the energy gap remains open. There exists a more exhaustive classification scheme for topological insulators in various dimensions (Kitaev, 2009; Qi et al., 2008; Ryu et al., 2010) which takes into account the constraints imposed by various symmetries. For a noninteracting system, the full Green's function G in the expression for P 3 [Eq. ( 63 )] is replaced by the noninteracting Green's function G 0 . Furthermore, the frequency integral can be carried out explicitly. After some manipulations, one finds a simple and beautiful formula

which expresses P 3 as the integral of the CS form over the 3D momentum space. For explicit models of topological insulators, such as the model by Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2009) discussed in Sec. III.A, one can evaluate this formula explicitly to obtain

in the topologically nontrivial state (Qi et al., 2008) . Essin, Moore and Vanderbilt also calculated P 3 for a variety of interesting models (Essin et al., 2009) . In a generic system without time-reversal or inversion symmetry, there may be non-topological contributions to the effective action (61) which modifies the formula of P 3 given in Eq. ( 65 ). However, such corrections vanishes when time-reversal symmetry or inversion symmetry is present, so that the quantized value P 3 = 1/2 (mod 1) in topological insulator remains robust (Essin et al., 2010; Malashevich et al., 2010) . Similar to the case of (4+1)D CS insulators, there is also an important difference between the θ term for (3+1)D topological insulators and the (2+1)D CS term for QH systems, which we shall briefly discuss (Maciejko et al., 2010) . In (2 + 1)D, the topological CS term dominates over the non-topological Maxwell term at low energies in the renormalization group flow, as a simple result of dimensional analysis. However, in (3 + 1)D, the θ term has the same scaling dimension as the Maxwell term, and is therefore equally important at low energies. The full set of modified Maxwell's equations including the topological term ( 62 ) is given by

which can be written in component form as

where D = E + 4πP and H = B -4πM only include the non-topological contributions. Alternatively, one can use the ordinary Maxwell's equations with modified constituent equations (40). These set of modified Maxwell equations are called the axion electrodynamics in field theory (Wilczek, 1987) . Even though the conventional Maxwell term and the topological term are both present, there exist experimental designs which can in principle extract the purely topological contributions (Maciejko et al., 2010) . Furthermore, the topological response is completely captured by the TFT, which we shall discuss. Starting from the TFT [Eq. 61], we take a functional derivative with respect to A µ , and obtain the current as

which is the general topological response of (3 + 1)D insulators. It is worth noting that we do not assume TR invariance here, otherwise P 3 should be quantized to be integer or halfinteger. In fact, here we assume a inhomogeneous P 3 (x, t).

It is interesting to notice that this electromagnetic response looks very similar to the 4D response in Eq. 58, with the only difference that A 4 is replaced by P 3 in Eq. ( 69 ). This is a manifestation of dimensional reduction at the level of the electromagnetic response. A more systematic treatment on this topic in phase space can be also be performed (Qi et al., 2008) . The physical consequences Eq. ( 69 ) can be understood by studying the following two cases. 1. Half-QH effect on the surface of a 3D topological insulator. Consider a system in which P 3 = P 3 (z) only depends on z. For example, this can be realized by the lattice Dirac model (Qi et al., 2008) with θ = θ(z) (Fradkin et al., 1986; Wilczek, 1987) . In this case, Eq. ( 69 ) becomes

which describes a QH effect in the xy plane with Hall conductivity σ xy = ∂ z P 3 /2π. A uniform electric field E x along the x direction induces a current density along the y direction j y = (∂ z P 3 /2π)E x , the integration of which along the z direction gives the Hall current

which corresponds to a 2D QH conductance

For a interface between a topologically nontrivial insulator with P 3 = 1/2 and a topologically trivial insulator with P 3 = 0, which can be taken as the vacuum, the Hall conductance is σ H = ∆P 3 = ±1/2. Aside from an integer ambiguity, the QH conductance is exactly quantized, independent of the details of the interface. As discussed in section III.D.1, the half quantum Hall effect on the surface is a reflection of the bulk topology with P 3 = 1/2, and can not be determined purely from the low energy surface models.

2. Topological magnetoelectric effect induced by a temporal gradient of P 3 . Having considered a time-independent P 3 , we now consider the case when P 3 = P 3 (t) is spatially uniform, but time-dependent. Equation (69) now becomes

which can be simply written as

Because the charge polarization P satisfies j = ∂ t P, we can integrate Eq. 71 in a static, uniform magnetic field B to get ∂ t P = -∂ t (P 3 B/2π), so that

This equation describes the charge polarization induced by a magnetic field, which is a magnetoelectric effect. The prominent feature here is that it is exactly quantized to a half-integer for a TR invariant topological insulator, which is called the topological magnetoelectric effect (Qi et al., 2008) (TME) .

Another related effect originating from the TFT is the Witten effect (Qi et al., 2008; Witten, 1979) . For this discussion, we assume that there are magnetic monopoles. For a uniform P 3 , Eq. ( 71 ) leads to

Even if magnetic monopole does not exist as elementary particles, for a lattice system, the monopole density ρ m = ∇ • B/2π can still be nonvanishing, and we obtain

Therefore, when P 3 is adiabatically changed from zero to Θ/2π, the magnetic monopole will acquire an electric charge of

where Q m is the magnetic charge. Such a relation was first derived by Witten in the context of the topological term in quantum chromodynamics (Witten, 1979) , and later discussed in the context of topological insulators (Qi et al., 2008; Rosenberg and Franz, 2010) . This effect could also appear under a different guise in topological exciton condensation (Seradjeh et al., 2009) , where a e/2 charge is induced by a vortex in the exciton condensate, which serves as the "magnetic monopole".

4. Further dimensional reduction to the two-dimensional Z2 topological insulator

Now we turn our attention to (2 + 1)D TR invariant Z 2 topological insulators. Similar to the WZW-type topological order parameter P 3 in (3 + 1)D, there is also a topological order parameter defined for (2 + 1)D TR invariant insulators. The main difference between (2 + 1)D and (3 + 1)D is that in (2 + 1)D we need two WZW extension parameters u and v, in contrast to a single parameter u in (3 + 1)D, which is a manifestation of the fact that both descend from the fundamental (4 + 1)D topological insulator (Zhang and Hu, 2001) . For a general interacting insulator, the (2 + 1)D topological order parameter is expressed as (Wang et al., 2010 )

where ǫ µνρστ is the totally antisymmetric tensor in five dimensions, taking value 1 when the variables are an even permutation of (k 0 , k 1 , k 2 , u, v). The cases P 2 = 0 and P 2 = 1/2 modulo an integer correspond to topologically trivial and nontrivial TR invariant insulators in (2 + 1)D, respectively. This topological order parameter is valid for interacting QSH systems in (2 + 1)D, including states in the Mott regime (Raghu et al., 2008) . P 2 can be physically measured by the fractional charge at the edge of the QSH state (Qi et al., 2008) .

So far, we have introduced topological order parameters for TR invariant topological insulators in 4D, 3D and 2D. These topological order parameters are defined in terms of the full single-particle Green's function. A caution in order is that these topological order parameters are not applicable to fractional states with ground state degeneracy (Bernevig and Zhang, 2006; Levin and Stern, 2009; Maciejko et al., 2010; Swingle et al., 2010) , for which a TFT approach is still possible, but simple topological order parameters are harder to find. In 3D, fractional topological insulators are characterized by a topological order parameter P 3 that is a rational multiple of 1/2 (Maciejko et al., 2010; Swingle et al., 2010) . Such states are consistent with TR symmetry if fractionally charged excitations and ground state degeneracies on spatial manifolds of nontrivial topology are present. When TR symmetry is broken on the surface, a fractional TME gives rise to half of a fractional QH effect on the surface (Maciejko et al., 2010; Swingle et al., 2010) .

Next we shall discuss the physical consequences implied by the topological order parameter such as P 2 and P 3 . The discussion we shall present is very general and its applicability does not depend on the spatial dimensions. Furthermore, since the topological order parameters are expressed in terms of the full Green's function of an interacting system, they can be useful to general interacting systems. Suppose we have a family of Hamiltonians labeled by several parameters. To be specific, we consider a typical phase diagram (Wang et al., 2010) [Fig. (36) ] for an interacting Hamiltonian H = H 0 (λ) + H 1 (g), where H 0 is the noninteracting part including terms such as t ij c † i c j , and H 1 is the electron-electron interaction part including terms such as the Hubbard interaction gn i↓ n i↑ . These two parts are determined by single-particle parameters λ = (λ 1 , λ 2 , • • • ) and coupling constants g = (g 1 , g 2 , • • • ). When (λ, g) are smoothly tuned, the ground state also evolves smoothly, as long as the energy gap remains open and the topological order parameters such as P 2 and P 3 remain unchanged. Only when the gap closes and the full Green's function G becomes singular, these topological order parameters have a jump, as indicated by the curve ab in Fig. (36) . The most important point in Fig. 36 can be illustrated by considering the vertical line BF . Starting from a noninteracting state F , one adiabatically tunes on interactions, and eventually there is a phase transition at E to the topological insulator (TI) state. The interacting state B, which is an interaction-induced topological insulator state, has a different topological order parameter from the corresponding noninteracting normal insulator (NI) state F . The difference in the topological order parameter thus provides a criterion for distinguishing topological classes of insulators in the presence of general interactions.

There have already been several theoretical proposals of strongly interacting topological insulators, i.e. topological Mott insulators (Raghu et al., 2008) . 2D topologically non- trivial insulating states have been obtained from the combination of a trivial noninteracting band structure and interaction terms (Guo and Franz, 2009; Raghu et al., 2008; Weeks and Franz, 2010) . Such topological insulators can be regarded as topologically nontrivial states arising from dynamically generated SOC (Wu et al., 2007; Wu and Zhang, 2004) . The effect of interactions on the the QSH state has also been recently studied (Rachel and Hur, 2010) . In 3D, strong topological insulators with topological excitations have been obtained (Pesin and Balents, 2010; Zhang et al., 2009) . Topological insulators have been suggested to exist in transition metal oxides (Shitade et al., 2009) , where the correlation effect is strong. It was also proposed that one could achieve the topological insulator state in Kondo insulators (Dzero et al., 2010) . All these topological Mott insulator states can be understood in the framework of the topological order parameter expressed in terms of the full Green's function (Wang et al., 2010) . Interaction-induced topological insulator states such as the topological Mott insulators proposed in Ref. (Raghu et al., 2008) correspond to regions represented by the point B in Fig. 36 , which has a trivial noninteracting unperturbed Hamiltonian H 0 (B) but acquires a nontrivial topological order parameter due to the interaction part H 1 (B) of the Hamiltonian. The previously discussed topological order parameters are useful for determining the phase diagrams of interacting systems.

For disordered systems, the topological order parameters are still applicable, provided that we use the disorder-averaged Green's functions. In this case, Fig. 36 can be regarded as a simple phase diagram of disordered systems, with g interpreted as the disorder strength. The representative point B is a disorder-induced topological insulator state. The disorderinduced TI state has been studied recently (Groth et al., 2009; Guo, 2010; Guo et al., 2010; Imura et al., 2009; Jiang et al., 2009; Li et al., 2009; Loring and Hastings, 2010; Obuse et al., 2008; Olshanetsky et al., 2010; Ostrovsky et al., 2009; Shindou and Murakami, 2009) . Therefore, the topological order parameters previously discussed have the ability to describe both interacting and disordered systems.

We shall now give a brief introduction to TBT. Even though this theory is only valid for non-interacting systems, it has become an important tool in the discovery of new topological materials. Unfortunately, evaluating the Z 2 invariants for a generic band structure is in general a difficult problem. Several approaches have been explored in the literature including spin Chern numbers (Fukui and Hatsugai, 2007; Prodan, 2009; Sheng et al., 2006) , topological invariants constructed from Bloch wave functions (Fu and Kane, 2006; Kane and Mele, 2005; Moore and Balents, 2007; Roy, 2009) , and discrete indices calculated from single-particle states at TRIM in the Brillouin zone (Fu and Kane, 2007) . We will focus on the last method for its simplicity (Fu and Kane, 2007) .

This basic quantity in this approach is the matrix element of the TR operator T between states with TR conjugate momenta k and -k (Fu and Kane, 2006) ,

Since B αβ is defined as a matrix element between Bloch states at TR conjugate momenta, it is expected that this quantity contains some information about the band topology of TR invariant topological insulators. At the TRIM Γ i , B(k = Γ i ) is antisymmetric, so that the following quantity can be defined (Fu and Kane, 2006) :

in which Pf stands for the Pfaffian of an antisymmetric matrix. Since Pf[B(Γ i )] 2 = det[B(Γ i )], we have δ i = ±1. It should be noticed that the wavefunctions |k, α must be chosen continuously in BZ to avoid ambiguity in the definition of δ i . In 1D, there are only two TRIM, and a "TR polarization" (Fu and Kane, 2006 ) can be defined as the product of δ i , π ≡ (-1)

which is a Z 2 analog to the charge polarization (King-Smith and Vanderbilt, 1993; Resta, 1994; Thouless, 1983; Zak, 1989) . A further analogy between the charge polarization and the TR polarization suggests the form of the Z 2 invariant for TR invariant topological insulators. If an angular parameter θ is tuned from 0 to 2π, the change in the charge polarization P after such a cycle is expressed as the first Chern number C 1 in the (k, θ) space. In fact, the same C 1 would gives the TKNN invariant (Thouless, 1983) if θ were regarded as a momentum. By analogy with P , the Z 2 invariant for (2 + 1)D topological insulators can be defined as (-1) ν2D = (-1) P θ (k2=0)-P θ (k2=π) ,

where P θ (k 2 ) = δ 1 δ 2 , δ i is defined at the TRIM k 1 = 0 or π, and k 2 is regarded as a parameter. Expanding Eq. ( 80 ) gives

where i = 1, 2, 3, 4 labels the four TRIM in the 2D Brillouin zone. (-1) ν2D = +1 implies a trivial insulator while (-1) ν2D = -1 implies a topological insulator. Furthermore, as a TR polarization, ν 2D also determines the way in which Kramers pairs of surface states are connected [Fig. (38) ], which suggests that bulk topology and edge physics are intimately related. This is another example of the "holographic principle" for topological phenomena in condensed matter physics.

We now discuss 3D topological insulators. It is interesting to note that in TBT the natural route is "dimensional increase", in contrast to the "dimensional reduction" procedure of TFT. From this dimensional increase, the 3D (strong) topological invariant is naturally defined as (Fu and Kane, 2007; Fu et al., 2007) (-1) ν3D = 8 i=1 δ i .

(82)

In addition to the strong invariant, it has been shown that the product of any four δ i 's for which the Γ i lie in the same plane is also gauge invariant, and defines topological invariants characterizing the band structure (Fu and Kane, 2007) . This fact leads to the definition of three additional invariants in 3D known as weak topological invariants (Fu and Kane, 2007; Fu et al., 2007; Moore and Balents, 2007; Roy, 2009) . These Z 2 invariants can be arranged as a 3D vector with elements ν k given by

where (ν 1 ν 2 ν 3 ) depend on the choice of reciprocal lattice vectors and are only strictly well defined when a well-defined lattice is present. It is useful to view these invariants as components of a mod 2 reciprocal lattice vector, When ν 0 = 0, states are classified according to G ν , and are called weak topological insulators (Fu et al., 2007) when the weak indices ν k are odd. Heuristically these states can be interpreted as stacked QSH states. As an example, consider planes of QSH stacked in the z direction. When the coupling between the layers is zero, the band dispersion will be independent of k z . It follows that the four δ i 's associated with the plane k z = π/a will have product -1 and will be the same as the four associated with the plane k z = 0. The topological invariants will then be given by ν 0 = 0 and G ν = (2π/a)ẑ. This structure will remain when hopping between the layers is introduced. More generally, when QSH states are stacked in the G, direction the invariant will be G ν = G mod 2. This implies that QSH states stacked along different directions G 1 and G 2 are equivalent if G 1 = G 2 mod 2 (Fu and Kane, 2007) . As for the surface states, when the coupling between the layers is zero, it is clear that the gap in the 2D system implies there will be no surface states on the top and bottom surfaces; only the side surfaces will have gapless states. We can also think about the stability of the surface states for the weak insulators. In fact, weak topological insulators are unstable with respect to disorder. We can heuristically see that they are less stable than the strong insulators in the following way. If we stack an odd number of QSH layers, there would at least be one delocalized surface branch. However, the surface states for an even number of layers can be completely localized by disorder or perturbations. Despite this instability, it has been shown (Ran et al., 2009) that the weak topological invariants guarantee the existence of gapless modes on certain crystal defects. For a dislocation with Burgers vector b it was shown that there will be gapless modes on the dislocation if G ν • b = (2n + 1)π for integer n.

Similar to the 2D topological insulator, there are connec- From Fu et al., 2007. tions between the bulk invariants of 3D topological insulator and the corresponding 2D surface state spectrum. As a sample, Fig. ( 39 ) shows four different topological classes for 3D band structures labeled with the corresponding (ν 0 ; ν 1 ν 2 ν 3 ).

The eight Γ i are represented as the vertices of a cube in momentum space, with the corresponding δ i shown as ± signs.

The lower panel shows a characteristic surface Brillouin zone for a 001 surface with the four Λ a labeled by either filled or solid circles, depending on the value of π a = δ i=(a1) δ i=(a2) . Generically it is expected that the surface band structure will resemble Fig. 38 (b) on paths connecting two filled circles or two empty circles, and will resemble Fig. 38 (a) on paths connecting a filled circle to an empty circle (Fu and Kane, 2007) . This consideration determines the 2D surface states qualitatively.

If an insulator has inversion symmetry, there is a simple algorithm to calculate the Z 2 invariant (Fu and Kane, 2007) : indeed, the replacement in Eq. ( 81 ) and Eq. ( 82 ) of δ i by

gives the correct Z 2 invariants. Here ξ 2m (Γ i ) = ±1 is the parity eigenvalue of the 2mth occupied energy band at Γ i [Fig. 37 ], which shares the same eigenvalue ξ 2m = ξ 2m-1 with its degenerate Kramers partner (Fu and Kane, 2007) . The product is only over half of the occupied bands. Since the definition of the δ i relies on parity eigenvalues, the δ i are only well-defined in this case when inversion symmetry is present (Fu and Kane, 2007) . However, for insulators without inversion symmetry, this algorithm is very useful. In fact, if we can deform a given insulator to an inversion-symmetric insulator and keep the energy gap open along the way, the resultant Z 2 invariants are the same as the initial ones due to topological invariance, but can be calculated from parity (Fu and Kane, 2007) .

We now briefly discuss the relation between the TFT and TBT. On the one hand, the TFT approach is very powerful to reveal various aspects of the low-energy physics, and it also provide a deep understanding of the universality among different systems. Furthermore, in contrast to TBT, TFT is valid for interacting systems. On the other hand, from a practical viewpoint, we also need fast algorithms to calculate topological invariants, which is the goal of TBT. An intuitive understanding of the TBT of Z 2 topological insulators is as follows. For integer-class CS topological insulators, the topological invariant C n is expressed as the integral of Green's functions (or Berry curvature, in the noninteracting limit). Therefore, the knowledge of Bloch states over the whole Brillouin zone is needed to calculate C n . For TR invariant Z 2 topological insulators, the TR symmetry constraint enables us to determine the topological class of a given insulator with less information: we do not need the information over the entire Brillouin zone. For insulators with inversion symmetry, the parity at several high-symmetry points completely determines the topological class (Fu and Kane, 2007) , which explains the success of TBT. As naturally expected, the TBT approach is related to the TFT approach. In fact, it has been recently proved (Wang et al., 2010) that the TFT description can be exactly reduced to the TBT in the noninteracting limit. We now outline this proof (Wang et al., 2010) . Starting from the expression for P 3 in Eq. ( 63 ) and Eq. ( 65 ), one can show that

By some topological argument, this expression for P 3 is shown to give the degree deg f of certain map (Dubrovin et al., 1985) from the Brillouin zone three-torus T 3 to the SU (2) group manifold. There are two seemingly different expressions for deg f , one of which is of integral form as given by Eq. ( 86 ), while the other is of discrete form and given simply by the number of points mapped to a arbitrarily chosen image in SU (2). Due to TR symmetry, if we choose the image point as one of the two antisymmetric matrices in SU (2) (e.g. iσ y ), we have an interesting "pair annihilation" of those points other than the eight TRIM (Wang et al., 2010) . The final result is exactly the Z 2 invariant from TBT. The explicit relation between TFT and TBT is (Wang et al., 2010) (-1) 2P3 = (-1) ν3D .

(87)

Soon after their discovery, the study of TR invariant topological insulators was generalized to TR invariant topological superconductors and superfluids (Kitaev, 2009; Qi et al., 2009; Roy, 2008; Schnyder et al., 2008) . There is a direct analogy between superconductors and insulators because the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for the quasiparticles of a superconductor is analogous to the Hamiltonian of a band insulator, with the superconducting gap corresponding to the band gap of the insulator.

3 He-B is an example of such a topological superfluid state. This TR invariant state has a full pairing gap in the bulk, and gapless surface states consisting of a single Majorana cone (Chung and Zhang, 2009; Qi et al., 2009; Roy, 2008; Schnyder et al., 2008) . In fact, the BdG Hamiltonian for 3 He-B is identical to the model Hamiltonian of a 3D topological insulator (Zhang et al., 2009) , and investigated extensively in Sec. III.A. In 2D, the classification of topological superconductors is very similar to that of topological insulators. TR breaking superconductors are classified by an integer (Read and Green, 2000; Volovik, 1988) , similar to quantum Hall insulators (Thouless et al., 1982) , while TR invariant superconductors are classified (Kitaev, 2009; Qi et al., 2009; Roy, 2008; Schnyder et al., 2008) by a Z 2 invariant in 1D and 2D, but by an integer (Z) invariant in 3D (Kitaev, 2009; Schnyder et al., 2008) .

Besides the TR invariant topological superconductors, the TR breaking topological superconductors have also attracted a lot of interest recently, because of their relation with non-Abelian statistics and their potential application to topological quantum computation. The TR breaking topological superconductors are described by an integer N . The vortex of a topological superconductor with odd topological quantum number N carries an odd number of Majorana zero modes (Volovik, 1999) , giving rise to non-Abelian statistics (Ivanov, 2001; Read and Green, 2000) which could provide a platform for topological quantum computing (Nayak et al., 2008) . The simplest model for an N = 1 chiral topological superconductor is realized in the p x + ip y pairing state of spinless fermions (Read and Green, 2000) . A spinful version of the chiral superconductor has been predicted to exist in Sr 2 RuO 4 (Mackenzie and Maeno, 2003) , but the experimental situation is far from definitive. Recently, several new proposals to realize Majorana fermion states in conventional superconductors have been investigated by making use of strong SOC (Fu and Kane, 2008; Qi et al., 2010; Sau et al., 2010) .

The simplest way to understand TR invariant topological superconductors is through their analogy with topological insulators. The 2D chiral superconducting state is the superconductor analog of the QH state. A QH state with Chern number N has N chiral edge states, while a chiral superconductor with topological quantum number N has N chiral Majorana edge states. Since the positive and negative energy states of the BdG Hamiltonian of a superconductor describe the same physical degrees of freedom, each chiral Majorana edge state has half the degrees of freedom of the chiral edge state of a QH system. Therefore, the chiral superconductor is the "minimal" topological state in 2D. The analogy between a chiral superconductor and a QH state is illustrated in the upper panels of Fig. 40 . Following the same analogy, one can consider the superconducting analog of QSH state -a "helical" superconductor in which fermions with up spins are paired in the p x + ip y state, and fermions with down spins are paired in the p xip y state. Such a TR invariant state has a full gap in the bulk, and counter-propagating helical Majorana states at the edge. In contrast, the edge states of the TR invariant topological insulator are helical Dirac fermions with twice the degrees of freedom. As is the case for the QSH state, a mass term for the edge states is forbidden by TR symmetry. Therefore, such a superconducting phase is topologically protected in the presence of TR symmetry, and can be described by a Z 2 topological quantum number (Kitaev, 2009; Qi et al., 2009; Roy, 2008; Schnyder et al., 2008) . The four types of 2D topological states of matter discussed here are summarized in Fig. 40 .

As a starting point, we first consider the Hamiltonian of the simplest nontrivial TR breaking superconductor, the p+ip superconductor (Read and Green, 2000) for spinless fermions:

with ǫ p = p 2 /2mµ and p ± = p x ± ip y . In the weak pairing phase with µ &gt; 0, the p x + ip y chiral superconductor is known to have chiral Majorana edge states propagating on each boundary, described by the Hamiltonian

where ψ -ky = ψ † ky is the quasiparticle creation operator (Read and Green, 2000) and the boundary is taken parallel to the y direction. The strong pairing phase µ &lt; 0 is trivial, and the two phases are separated by a topological phase transition at µ = 0.

In the BHZ model for the QSH state in HgTe (Bernevig et al., 2006) , if we ignore the coupling terms between spin up and spin down electrons, the system is a direct product of two independent QH systems in which spin up and spin down electrons have opposite Hall conductance. In the same way, the simplest model for the topologically nontrivial TR invariant superconductor in 2D is given by the following Hamiltonian: Cooper pairs, respectively. Comparing this model Hamiltonian (90) for the topological superconductor with the BHZ model of the HgTe topological insulator [Eq. 2], we first see that the term proportional to the identity matrix in the BHZ model is absent here, reflecting the generic particle-hole symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian for superconductors. On the other hand, the terms proportional to the Pauli matrices σ a are identical in both cases. Therefore, a topological superconductor can be viewed as a topological insulator with particle-hole symmetry. The topological superconductor Hamiltonian also has half as many degrees of freedom as the topological insulator. The model Hamiltonian (90) is expressed in terms of the Nambu spinor Ψ(p) which artificially doubles the degrees of freedom as compared to the topological insulator Hamiltonian. Bearing these differences in mind, in analogy with the QSH system, we know that the edge states of the TR invariant system described by the Hamiltonian (90) consist of spin up and spin down quasiparticles with opposite chiralities:

The quasiparticle operators ψ ky ↑ , ψ ky↓ can be expressed in terms of the eigenstates u ky (x), v ky (x) of the BdG Hamiltonian as

from which the TR transformation of the quasiparticle operators can be determined to be T

In other words, (ψ ky↑ , ψ -ky↓ ) transforms under TR as a Kramers doublet, which forbids a gap in the edge state spectrum when TR is preserved by preventing the mixing of spin up and spin down modes. To see this explicitly, notice that the only k yindependent term that can be added to the edge Hamiltonian ( 91 ) is im ky ψ -ky↑ ψ ky ↓ , with m real. However, such a term is odd under TR, which implies that any backscattering between quasiparticles is forbidden by TR symmetry. The discussion above is exactly parallel to the Z 2 topological characterization of QSH system. In fact, the Hamiltonian (90) has exactly the same form as the four-band effective Hamiltonian of the QSH effect in HgTe quantum wells (Bernevig et al., 2006) . The edge states of the QSH insulator consist of an odd number of Kramers pairs, which remain gapless under any small TR invariant perturbation (Wu et al., 2006; Xu and Moore, 2006) . Such a "helical liquid" with an odd number of Kramers pairs at the Fermi energy cannot be realized in any bulk 1D system, and can only appear holographically as the edge theory of a 2D QSH insulator (Wu et al., 2006) . Similarly, the edge state theory Eq. ( 91 ) can be called a "helical Majorana liquid", and can only exist on the boundary of a Z 2 topological superconductor. Once such a topological phase is established, it is robust under any TR invariant perturbations such as Rashba-type SOC and s-wave pairing, even if spin rotation symmetry is broken. The edge helical Majorana liquid can be detected by electric transport through a quantum point contact between two topological superconductors (Asano et al., 2010) . The 2D Hamiltonian (90) describes a spin-triplet pairing, the spin polarization of which is correlated with the orbital angular momentum of the pair. Such a correlation can be naturally generalized to 3D where spin polarization and orbital angular momentum are both vectors. The Hamiltonian of such a 3D superconductor is given by

where we use a different basis

∆ αj is a 3 × 3 matrix with α = 1, 2, 3 and j = x, y, z. Interestingly, an example of such a Hamiltonian is given by the well-known 3 He-B phase, for which the order parameter ∆ αj is determined by an orthogonal matrix ∆ αj = ∆u αj , u ∈ SO(3) (Vollhardt and Wölfle, 1990) . Here and below we ignore the dipole-dipole interaction term (Leggett, 1975) , since it does not affect any essential topological properties. Performing a spin rotation, ∆ αj can be diagonalized to ∆ αj = ∆δ αj , in which case the Hamiltonian (92) can be expressed as:

Compared with the model Hamiltonian Eq. ( 31 ) for the simplest 3D topological insulators (Zhang et al., 2009) , we see that the Hamiltonian (93) has the same form as that for Bi 2 Se 3 (up to a basis transformation), but with complex fermions replaced by Majorana fermions. The kinetic energy term p 2 /2mµ corresponds to the momentum dependent mass term M (p) = M -B 1 p 2 z -B 2 p 2 of the topological insulator. The weak pairing phase µ &gt; 0 corresponds to the nontrivial topological insulator phase, and the strong pairing phase µ &lt; 0 corresponds to the trivial insulator. From this analogy, we see that the superconductor Hamiltonian in the weak pairing phase describes a topological superconductor with gapless surface states protected by TR symmetry. Different from the topological insulator, the surface states of the topological superconductor are Majorana fermions described by

with the Majorana condition ψ -k = σ x ψ †T k . We see that this Hamiltonian for the surface Majorana fermions of a topological superconductor takes the same form as the surface Dirac Hamiltonian of a topological insulator in this special basis. However, because of the generic particle-hole symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian for superconductors, the possible particle-hole symmetry breaking terms for surface Dirac fermions such as a finite chemical potential is absent for surface Majorana fermions. Because of the particle-hole symmetry and TR symmetry, the spin lies strictly in the plane perpendicular to the surface normal, and the integer winding number of the spin around the momentum is now a welldefined quantity. This integer winding number gives a Z classification of the 3D topological superconductor (Kitaev, 2009; Schnyder et al., 2008) . The surface state remains gapless under any small TR invariant perturbation, since the only available mass term m k ψ T -k σ y ψ k is TR odd. The Majorana surface state is spin-polarized, and can thus be detected by its special contribution to the spin relaxation of an electron on the surface of 3 He-B, similar to the measurement of electron spin correlation in a solid state system by nuclear magnetic resonance (Chung and Zhang, 2009) .

From the discussion above, we see that the model Hamiltonian for the topological superconductor is the same as that for the topological insulator, but with the additional particlehole symmetry. The simultaneous presence of both TR and particle-hole symmetry gives a different classification for the 2D and 3D topological superconductors, in that the 3D TR invariant topological superconductors are classified by integer (Z) classes, and the 2D TR invariant topological superconductors are classified by the Z 2 classes. To define an integervalued topological invariant (Schnyder et al., 2008) , we start from a generic mean-field BdG Hamiltonian for a 3D TR invariant superconductor, which can be written in momentum FIG. 41 Setting for detecting the Majorana surface states of the 3 He-B phase, which consist of a single Majorana cone. When electrons are injected into 3 He-B, they exist as "bubbles". If the injected electrons are spin-polarized, the spin will relax by interaction with the surface Majorana modes, and this relaxation is strongly anisotropic. From Chung and Zhang, 2009. space as

In general, ψ k is a vector with N components, and h k and ∆ k are N × N matrices. The matrix T is the TR matrix satisfying T † h k T = h T -k , T 2 = -I and T † T = I, with I the identity matrix. We have chosen a special basis in which the BdG Hamiltonian H k has a special off-diagonal form. It should be noted that such a choice is only possible when the system has both TR symmetry and particle-hole symmetry. These two symmetries also require T ∆ † k to be Hermitian, which makes the matrix h k + iT ∆ † k generically non-Hermitian. The matrix h k + iT ∆ † k can be decomposed by a singular value decomposition as

unitary matrices and D k a diagonal matrix with nonnegative elements. One can see that the diagonal elements of D k are actually the positive eigenvalues of H k . For a fully gapped superconductor, D k is positive definite, and we can adiabatically deform it to the identity matrix I without closing the superconducting gap. During this deformation, the matrix

The integer-valued topological invariant characterizing topological superconductors is defined as the winding number of Q k (Schnyder et al.,

We note that the topological invariant ( 96 ) is expressed as an integral over the entire Brillouin zone, similar to its counterpart for topological insulators. However, there is a key difference. Whereas the insulating gap is well defined over the entire Brillouin zone, the superconducting pairing gap in the BdG equation is only well defined close to the Fermi surface. Indeed, superconductivity arises from a Fermi surface instability, at least in the BCS limit. Therefore, one would like to define topological invariants for a topological superconductor strictly in terms of Fermi surface quantities. The desired topological invariant can be obtained by reducing the winding number in Eq. ( 96 ) to a integral over the Fermi surface (Qi et al., 2010) :

where s is summed over all disconnected Fermi surfaces and sgn(δ s ) denotes the sign of the pairing amplitude on the sth Fermi surface. C 1s is the first Chern number of the sth Fermi surface (denoted by FS s ): 42(a) ]. In the latter case, if we take the α → 0 limit, we arrive at the result N W = 1 for the 3 He-B phase, which indicates that 3 He-B is topologically nontrivial (Volovik, 2003) .

For 2D TR invariant superconductors, a procedure of dimensional reduction leads to the following simple Fermi surface topological invariant:

The criterion ( 99 ) is quite simple: a 2D TR invariant superconductor is topologically nontrivial (trivial) if there is an odd (even) number of Fermi surfaces, each of which encloses one TR invariant point in the Brillouin zone and has negative pairing. As an example, see Fig. 42(c ), where Fermi surfaces 2 and 3 have negative pairing. Fermi surfaces 3 and 4 enclose an even number of TR invariant momenta, which do not affect the Z 2 topological invariant. There is only one Fermi surface, surface 2, which encloses on odd number of TR invariant momenta and has negative pairing. As a result, the Z 2 topological invariant is (-1) 1 = -1.

For 1D TR invariant superconductors, a further dimensional reduction can be carried out to give

where s is summed over all the Fermi points between 0 and π. In geometrical terms, a 1D TR invariant superconductor is nontrivial (trivial) if there is an odd number of Fermi points between 0 and π with negative pairing. We illustrate this formula in Fig. 42(d) , where the sign of pairing on the red (blue) Fermi point is -1 (+1), so that the number of Fermi points with negative pairing is 1 if the chemical potential µ = µ 1 or µ = µ 2 , and 0 if µ = µ 3 . The superconducting states with µ = µ 1 and µ = µ 2 can be adiabatically deformed to each other without closing the gap. However, the superconductor with µ = µ 3 can only be obtained from that with µ 2 through a topological phase transition, where the pairing order parameter changes sign on one of the Fermi points. It is easy to see from this example that there are two classes of 1D TR invariant superconductors.

1. Majorana zero modes in p + ip superconductors

Besides the new TR invariant topological superconductors, the TR breaking topological superconductors have attracted a lot of interest because of their relevance to non-Abelian statistics and topological quantum computation. In a p + ip superconductor described by Eq. ( 88 ), it can be shown that the core of a superconducting vortex contains a localized quasiparticle with exactly zero energy (Volovik, 1999) . The corresponding quasiparticle operator γ is a Majorana fermion obeying [γ, H] = 0 and γ † = γ. When two vortices wind around each other, the two Majorana fermions γ 1 , γ 2 in their cores transform nontrivially. Because the phase of the charge-2e order parameter winds by 2π around each vortex, an electron acquires a Berry phase of π when winding once around a vortex. Since the Majorana fermion operator is a superposition of electron creation and annihilation operators, it also acquires a π phase shift, i.e. a minus sign when winding around another vortex. Consequently, when two vortices are exchanged, the Majorana operators γ 1 , γ 2 must transform as γ 1 → γ 2 , γ 2 → -γ 1 . The additional minus sign may be associated with γ 1 or γ 2 , but not both, so that after a full winding we have γ 1(2) → -γ 1(2) . Since two Majorana fermions γ 1 and γ 2 define one complex fermion operator γ 1 + iγ 2 , the two vortices actually share two internal states labeled by iγ 1 γ 2 = ±1. When there are 2N vortices in the system, the core states span a 2 N -dimensional Hilbert space. The braiding of vortices leads to non-Abelian unitary transformations in this Hilbert space, implying that the vortices in this system obey non-Abelian statistics (Ivanov, 2001; Read and Green, 2000) . Because the internal states of the vortices are not localized on each vortex but shared in a nonlocal fashion between the vortices, the coupling of the internal state to the environment is exponentially small. As a result, the superposition of different internal states is immune to decoherence, which is ideal for the purpose of quantum computation. Quantum computation with topologically protected q-bits is generally known as topological quantum computation, and is currently an active field of research (Nayak et al., 2008) .

Several experimental candidates for p-wave superconductivity have been proposed, among which Sr 2 RuO 4 , which is considered as the most promising candidate for 2D chiral superconductivity (Mackenzie and Maeno, 2003) . However, many properties of this system remain unclear, such as whether this superconducting phase is gapped and whether there are gapless edge states.

Fortunately, there is an alternate route towards topological superconductivity without p-wave pairing. In 1981, Jackiw and Rossi (Jackiw and Rossi, 1981) showed that adding a Majorana mass term to a single flavor of massless Dirac fermions in (2 + 1)D would lead to a Majorana zero mode in the vortex core. Such a Majorana mass term can be naturally interpreted as the pairing field due to the proximity coupling to a conventional s-wave superconductor. There are now three different proposals to realize this route towards topological superconductivity: the superconducting proximity effect on the 2D surface state of the 3D topological insulator (Fu and Kane, 2008) , on the 2D TR breaking topological insulator (Qi et al., 2010) , and on semiconductors with strong Rashba SOC (Sau et al., 2010) . We shall review these three proposals in the following.

2. Majorana fermions in surface states of the topological insulator Fu and Kane (Fu and Kane, 2008) proposed a way to realize the Majorana zero mode in a superconducting vortex core by making use of the surface states of 3D topological insulators. Consider a topological insulator such as Bi 2 Se 3 , which has a single Dirac cone on the surface with Hamiltonian from Eq. 34:

where ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ ) T and we have taken into account a finite chemical potential µ. Consider now the superconducting proximity effect of a conventional s-wave superconductor on the 2D surface states, which leads to the pairing term H ∆ = ∆ψ † ↑ ψ † ↓ + h.c. The BdG Hamiltonian is given by H BdG = 1 2 p Ψ † H p Ψ, where Ψ † ≡ ψ † ψ and

The vortex core of such a superconductor has been shown to have a single Majorana zero mode, similar to a p + ip superconductor (Fu and Kane, 2008; Jackiw and Rossi, 1981) . To understand this phenomenon, one can consider the case of finite µ, and introduce a TR breaking mass term mσ z in the surface state Hamiltonian (101). As discussed in Sec. III.B, this opens a gap of magnitude |m| on the surface. Considering the case µ &gt; m &gt; 0, µm ≪ m, the Fermi level in the normal state lies near the bottom of the parabolic dispersion, and we can consider a "nonrelativistic approximation" to the massive Dirac Hamiltonian,

where ψ + is the positive energy branch of the surface states.

In momentum space, ψ +p = u p ψ ↑ + v p ψ ↓ with u p =

We see that in this limit, the surface Hamiltonian is the same as that of a spinless p + ip superconductor [Eq. ( 88 )]. When the mass m is turned on from zero to a finite value, it can be shown that as long as m &lt; µ, the superconducting gap near the Fermi surface remains finite, so that the Majorana zero mode we obtained in the limit 0 &lt; µm ≪ m must remain at zero energy for the original m = 0 system. Once we have shown the existence of a Majorana zero mode at finite µ, taking the µ → 0 limit for a finite ∆ also leaves the superconducting gap open, so that the Majorana zero mode is still present at µ = 0.

From the analogy with the p + ip superconductor shown above, we also see that the non-Abelian statistics of vortices with Majorana zero modes apply to this new system as well. A key difference between this system and a chiral p + ip superconductor is that the latter necessarily breaks TR symmetry while the former can be TR invariant. Only a conventional s-wave superconductor is required to generate the Majorana zero modes in this proposal and in the other proposals discussed in the following subsection. This is an important advantage compared to previous proposals requiring an unconventional p + ip pairing mechanism.

There is also a lower dimensional analog of this nontrivial surface state superconductivity. When the edge states of 2D QSH insulator are in proximity with an s-wave superconductor and a ferromagnetic insulator, one Majorana fermion appears at each domain wall between ferromagnetic region and superconducting region ( (Fu and Kane, 2009) ). The Majorana fermion in this system can only move along the 1D QSH edge, so that non-Abelian statistics is not well-defined. Because an electron cannot be backscattered on the QSH edge, the scattering of the edge electron by a superconducting region induced by proximity effect is always perfect Andreev reflection (Adroguer et al., 2010; Guigou and Cayssol, 2010; Sato et al., 2010) .

From the above analysis, we see that conventional s-pairing in the surface Hamiltonian (101) induces topologically nontrivial superconductivity with Majorana fermions. There is a 2D system which is described by a Hamiltonian very similar to Eq. ( 101 ), i.e. a 2D electron gas with Rashba SOC. The Hamiltonian is H = d 2 x ψ † p 2 2m + α(σ × p) • ẑµ ψ, which differs from the surface state Hamiltonian only by the spin-independent term p 2 /2m. Consequently, when conventional s-wave pairing is introduced, each of the two spin-split Fermi surfaces forms a nontrivial superconductor. However, the Majorana fermions from these two Fermi surfaces annihilate each other so that the s-wave superconductor in the Rashba system is trivial. It was pointed out recently (Sau et al., 2010) that a nontrivial superconducting phase can be obtained by introducing a TR breaking term M σ z into the Hamiltonian, which splits the degeneracy near k = 0. If the chemical potential is tuned to |µ| &lt; |M |, the inner Fermi surface disappears. Therefore, superconductivity is only induced by pairing on the outer Fermi surface, and becomes topologically nontrivial. Physically, one cannot induce a TR breaking mass term by applying a magnetic field in the perpendicular direction, because the magnetic field may destroy superconductivity. Two ways to realize a TR breaking mass term have been proposed: by applying an in-plane magnetic field and making use of the Dresselhaus SOC (Alicea, 2010) , or by exchange coupling to a ferromagnetic insulating layer (Sau et al., 2010) . The latter proposal requires a heterostructure consisting of a superconductor, a 2D electron gas with Rashba SOC, and a magnetic insulator.

This mechanism can also be generalized to the 1D semiconductor wires with Rashba SOC coupling in proximity with a superconductor (Oreg et al., 2010; Wimmer et al., 2010) . Despite the 1D nature of the wires, non-Abelian statistics is still possible by making use of wire networks (Alicea et al., 2010) .

More recently, a new approach to realize a topological superconductor phase has been proposed (Qi et al., 2010) , which is based on the proximity effect to a 2D QH or QAH insulator. Integer QH states are classified by an integer N corresponding to the first Chern number in momentum space and equal to the Hall conductance in units of e 2 /h. Consider a QH insulator with Hall conductance N e 2 /h in close proximity to a superconductor. Even if the pairing strength inducing by the superconducting proximity effect is infinitesimally small, the resulting state is topologically equivalent to a chiral topological superconductor with Z topological quantum number N = 2N . An intuitive way to understand such a relation between QH and topological superconducting phases is through the evolution of the edge states. The edge state of a QH state with Chern number N = 1 is described by the effective 1D Hamiltonian H edge = py vp y η † py η py , where η † py , η py are creation/annihilation operators for a complex spinless fermion. We can decompose η py into its real and imaginary parts, up to a trivial shift of the energy. In comparison with the edge theory of the chiral topological superconducting state, the QH edge state can be considered as two identical copies of chiral Majorana fermions, so that the QH phase with Chern number N = 1 can be considered as a chiral topological superconducting state with Chern number N = 2, even for infinitesimal pairing amplitudes.

An important consequence of such a relation between QH and topological superconducting phases is that the QH plateau transition from N = 1 to N = 0 will generically split into two transitions when superconducting pairing is introduced. Between the two transitions, there will be a new topological superconducting phase with odd winding number N = 1 [Fig. 43 ]. Compared to other approaches, the emergence of the topological superconducting phase at a QH plateau transition is determined topologically, so that this approach does not depend on any fine tuning or details of the theory.

A natural concern raised by this approach is that the strong magnetic field usually required for QH states can suppress superconductivity. The solution to this problem can be found in a special type of QH state -the QAH state, which is a TR breaking gapped state with nonzero Hall conductance in the absence of an external orbital magnetic field (Sec. II.E). There exist now two realistic proposals for realizing the QAH state experimentally, both of which make use of the TR invariant topological insulator materials Mn-doped HgTe QWs (Liu et al., 2008) , and Cr-or Fe-doped Bi 2 Se 3 thin films (Yu et al., 2010) . The latter material is proposed to be ferromagnetic, and can thus exhibit a quantized Hall conductance at zero magnetic field. The former material is known to be paramagnetic for low Mn concentrations, but only a small magnetic field is needed to polarize the Mn spins and drive the system into a QAH phase. This requirement is not so prohibitive, because a nonzero magnetic field is already necessary to generate superconducting vortices and the associated Majorana zero modes.

The next obvious question is how to detect the Majorana fermion if such a proposal is experimentally realized. There exist two similar theoretical proposals of electrical transport measurements to detect these Majorana fermions (Akhmerov et al., 2009; Fu and Kane, 2009) . Consider the geometry shown in Fig. 44 . This device is a combination of the inhomogeneous structures on the surface of a topological insulator discussed in the previous subsections. The input and output of the circuit consist of a chiral fermion coming from a domain wall between two ferromagnets. This chiral fermion is incident on a superconducting region where it splits into two chiral Majorana fermions. The chiral Majorana fermions then recombine into an outgoing electron or hole after traveling around the superconducting island. More explicitly, an electron incident from the source can be transmitted to the drain as an electron, or converted to a hole by an Andreev process in which charge 2e is absorbed into the superconducting condensate. To illustrate the idea we discuss the behavior for a E = 0 quasiparticle (Fu and Kane, 2009) . A chiral fermion incident at point a meets the superconductor and evolves from an electron c † a into a fermion ψ built from the Majorana operators γ 1 and γ 2 . The arbitrariness in the sign of γ 1,2 allows us to choose ψ = γ 1 + iγ 2 . After the quasiparticle winds around the superconducting region, ψ recombines into a complex fermion at point d. This fermion must be either c † d or c d , since a superposition of the two is not a fermion operator and is thus forbidden. To determine the correct operator we can use adiabatic continuity. When the size of the superconductor shrinks continuously to zero, points a and d continuously tend to each other. Adiabatic continuity implies that an incident E = 0 electron is transmitted as an electron, c † a → c † d . However, if the ring encloses a quantized flux Φ = nhc/2e, this adiabatic argument must be reconsidered. When n is an odd integer, the two Majorana fermions acquire an additional relative phase of π, since each flux quantum hc/2e is a π flux for an electron, and thus π for a Majorana fermion. Up to an overall sign, one can take γ 1 → -γ 1 and γ 2 → γ 2 . Thus, when the ring encloses an odd number of flux quanta, c † a → c d , and an incident E = 0 electron is converted to a hole. The general consequences of this were calculated in detail (Akhmerov et al., 2009; Fu and Kane, 2009) , and it was shown that the output current (through arm d in the lower panel of Fig. 44 ) changes sign when the number of flux quanta in the ring jumps between odd and even. This unique behavior of the current provides a way to electrically detect Majorana fermions.

Besides these two proposals reviewed above, several other theoretical proposals have also been made recently to observe the Majorana fermion state, which make use of the Coulomb charging energy (Fu, 2010) or a flux qubit (Hassler et al., 2010) . More indirectly, Majorana fermions can also be detected through their contribution to Josephson coupling (Fu and Kane, 2008, 2009; Linder and Sudbo, 2010; Linder et al., 2010; Lutchyn et al., 2010; Tanaka et al., 2009) . For a topological superconductor ring with Majorana fermions at both ends, the period of Josephson current is doubled, independent from the physical realization (Fu and Kane, 2009; Kitaev, 2001; Lutchyn et al., 2010) .

The subject of topological insulators and topological superconductors is now one of the most active fields of research in condensed matter physics, developing at a rapid pace. Theorists have systematically classified topological states in all dimensions. Ref. (Qi et al., 2008) initiated the classification program of all topological insulators according to discrete particle-hole symmetry and the TR symmetry, and noticed a periodic structure with period eight, which is known in mathematics as the Bott periodicity. More extended and systematic classification of all topological insulator and superconductor states are obtained according to TR, particle-hole and bipartite symmetries (Kitaev, 2009; Qi et al., 2008; Ryu et al., 2010; Schnyder et al., 2008; Stone et al., 2010) . Such classification scheme gives a "periodic table" of topological states, which may play a similar role as the familiar period table of elements. For future progress on the theoretical side, the most important outstanding problems include interaction and dis-order effects, realistic predictions for topological Mott insulator materials, a deeper understanding of fractional topological insulators and realistic predictions for materials realizations of such states, the effective field theory description of the topological superconducting state, and realistic materials predictions for topological superconductors. On the experimental side, the most important task is to grow materials with sufficient purity so that the bulk insulating behavior can be reached, and to tune the Fermi level close to the Dirac point of the surface state. Hybrid structures between topological insulators and magnetic and superconducting states will be intensively investigated, with a focus on detecting exotic emergent particles such as the image magnetic monopole, the axion and the Majorana fermion. The theoretical prediction of the QAH state is sufficiently realistic and its experimental discovery appears to be imminent. The topological quantization of the TME effect in 3D and the spin-charge separation effect in 2D could experimentally determine the topological order parameter of this novel state of matter.

Due to space limitations, we did not discuss in detail the potential for applications of topological insulators and superconductors. It would be interesting to explore the possibility of electronic devices with low power consumption based on the dissipationless edge channels of the QSH state, spintronics devices based on the unique current-spin relationship in the topological surface states, infrared detectors, and thermoelectric applications. Topological quantum computers based on Majorana fermions remain a great inspiration in the field.

Topological insulators and superconductors offer a platform to test many novel ideas in particle physics -a "baby universe" where the mysterious θ vacuum is realized, where exotic particles roam freely and where compactified extra dimension can be tested experimentally. In the introduction to this article we drew an analogy between the search for new states of matter and the discovery of elementary particles. Up to now, the most important states of quantum matter were first discovered empirically and often serendipitously. On the other hand, the Einstein-Dirac approach has been most successful in searching for the fundamental laws of nature: pure logical reasoning and beautiful mathematical equations guided and predicted subsequent experimental discoveries. The success of theoretical predictions in the field of topological insulators shows that this powerful approach works equally well in condensed matter physics, hopefully inspiring many more examples to come.

We are deeply grateful to Taylor L. Hughes , Chao-Xing Liu , Joseph Maciejko and Zhong Wang for their invaluable inputs which made the current manuscript possible. We would like to thank Andrei Bernevig , Hartmut Buhmann , Yulin Chen , Suk Bum Chung , Yi Cui , Xi Dai , Dennis Drew , Zhong Fang , Aharon Kapitulnik , Andreas Karch , Laurens Molenkamp , Naoto Nagaosa , S. Raghu , Zhi-Xun Shen , Cenke Xu , Qikun Xue , Haijun Zhang for their close collaboration and for their important contributions reviewed in this paper. We benefitted greatly from the discussions with colleagues Leon Balents , Mac Beasley , Carlo Beenakker , Marcel Franz , Liang Fu , David Goldhaber-Gordon , Zahid Hasan , Charlie Kane , Alexei Kitaev , Steve Kivelson , Andreas Ludwig , Joel Moore , Phuan Ong , Rahul Roy , Shinsei Ryu , Ali Yazdani and Jan Zaanen . This work is supported by the Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering , under contract DE-AC02-76SF00515 , the NSF under the grant number DMR-0904264 , the ARO under the grant number W911NF-09-1-0508 and the Keck Foundation .